CHO Glossary
miss penalty The time required to fetch a nonblockingcache A cache that allows the
block into a level of the memory hierarchy processor to make references to the cache
from the lower level, including the time to while the cache is handling an earlier miss.
access the block, transmit it from one level nonuniform memory access (NUMA) A
to the other,and insert it in the level that ex  type of single-address space multiprocessor
perienced the miss. in which some memory accesses are faster
miss rate The fraction of memory accesses than others depending which processor asks
not found in a levelofthe memoryhierarchy. for which word.
most significant bit The leftmost bit in a nonvolatile memory A form of memory
MIPS word. that retains data even in the absence of a
motherboard A plastic board containing power source and that is used to store pro 
packages ofintegrated circuits or chips, in  grams between runs. Magnetic disk is non 
cluding processor, cache, memory, and volatile and DRAM is not.
connectors for I/O devices such as networks nonvolatile Storage device where data re 
and disks. tains its value even when power is removed.
multicomputer Parallel processors with nop An instruction that does no operation
multiple private addresses. to change state.
multicyde implementation Also called NOR A logical bit-by-bit operation with
multiple clock cycle implementation. An two operands that calculates the NOT of the
implementation in which an instruction is OR of the two operands.
executed in multiple clock cycles. NOR gate An inverted OR gate.
multilevel cache A memoryhierarchywith normalized A number in floating-point
multiple levels of caches, rather than just a notation that has no leading Os.
cache and main memory. NOT A logical bit-by-bit operation with
multiple issue A scheme whereby multiple one operand that inverts the bits; that is,
instructions are launched in I clock cycle. it replaces every 1 with a 0, and every 0
multiprocessor Parallel processors with a with a I.
single shared address. object-oriented language A programming
multistage network A network that sup  language that is oriented around objects
plies a small switch at each node. rather than actions, or data versus logic.
NAND gate An inverted AND gate. opcode The field that denotes the opera 
network bandwidth Informally, the peak tion and format of an instruction.
transfer rate of a network; can refer to the operating system Supervising program
speed ofa single link or the collective trans  that manages the resources of a computer
fer rate of all links in the network. for the benefit of the programs that run on
next-state function A combinationalli.lllc  that machine.
tion that, given the inputs and the current out-of-order execution A situation in
state, determines the next state of a finite pipelined execution when an instruction
state machine. blocked from executing does not cause the
nonblocking assignment An assignment following instructions to wait.
that continues after evaluating the right-hand output device A mechanism that conveys
side, assigning the left-hand side the value the result of a computation to a user or an 
only after all right-hand sides are evaluated. other computer.