8.2 Disk Storage and Dependability 575
with many small disks, performance would improve because there would be more
read heads, and there would be advantages in cost, power, and floor space since
smaller disks are much more efficient per gigabyte than larger disks. Redundancy
was needed because the many more smaller disks had lower reliability than a few
large disks.
By having many small disks, the cost of extra redundancy to improve depend 
ability is small relative to the large disks. Thus, dependability was more affordable
if you constructed a redundant array of inexpensive disks. In retrospect, this was
the key advantage.
How much redundancy do you need? Do you need extra information to find
the faults? Does it matter how you organize the data and the extra check informa 
tion on these disks? The paper that coined the term gave an evolutionary answer
to these questions, starting with the simplest but most expensive solution. Figure
8.6 shows the evolution and example cost in number of extra check disks. To keep
track of the evolution, the authors numbered the stages of RAID, and they are still
used today.
No Redundancy (RAID 0)
Simply spreading data over multiple disks, called striping, automatically forces striping Allocation oflogically
accesses to several disks. Striping across a set of disks makes the collection appea r sequential blocks to separate
disks to allow higher perfor 
to software as a single large disk, which simplifies storage management. It also
mance than a single disk can
improves performance for large accesses, since many disks can operate at once.
deliver.
Video-editing systems, for example, often stripe their data and may not worry
about dependability as much as, say, databases.
RAID 0 is something of a misnomer as there is no redundancy. However, RAID
levels are often left to the operator to set when creating a storage system, and
RAID 0 is often listed as one of the options. Hence, the term RAID 0 has become
widely used.
Mirroring (RAID 1)
This traditional scheme for tolerating disk failure, called mirroring or shadowing, mirroring Writing the identi 
o.
uses twice as many disks as does RAID Whenever data are written to one disk, cal data to multiple disks to
increase data availability.
those data are also written to a redundant disk, so that there are always two copies
of the information. If a disk fails, the system just goes to the "mirror" and reads its
contents to get the desired information. Mirroring is the most expensive RAID
solution, since it requires the most disks.
Error Detecting and Correcting Code (RAID 2)
RAID 2 borrows an error detection and correction scheme most often used for
memories (see . Appendix B). Since RAID 2 has fallen into disuse, we'll not
describe it here.