8.5 Interfacing I/ O Devices to the Processor, Memory, and Operating System 593
• Appendix A shows an exception handler for a simple I/O task on pages A-36 to
A-37.
How do the interrtlpt priority levels (IPL) correspond to these mechanisms? The
IPL is an operating system invention. It is stored in the memory of the process,
and every process is given an IPL. At the lowest IPL, all interrupts are permitted.
Conversely, at the highest IPL, all interrupts are blocked. Raising and lowering the
IPL involves changes to the interrupt mask field of the Status register.
Elaboration: The two least significant bits of the pending interrupt and interrupt
mask fields are for software interrupts, which are lower priority. These are typically
used by higher-priority interrupts to leave work for lower-priority interrupts to do once
the immediate reason for the interrupt is handled. Once the higher-priority interrupt is
finished, the lower-priority tasks will be noticed and handled.
Transferring the Data between a Device and Memory
We have seen two different methods that enable a device to communicate with the
processor. These two techniques-polling and I/O interrupts- form the basis for
two methods of implementing the transfer of data between the I/O device and
memory. Both these techniques work best with lower-bandwidth devices, where
we are more interested in reducing the cost of the device controller and interface
than in providing a high-bandwidth transfer. Both polling and interrupt-driven
transfers put the burden of moving data and managing the transfer on the proces 
sor. After looking at these two schemes, we will examine a scheme more suitable
for higher-perfo rmance devices or collections of devices.
We can use the processor to transfer data between a device and memory based
on polling. In real-time applications, the processor loads data from I/O device
registers and stores them into memory.
An alternative mechanism is to make the transfer of data interrupt driven. In
this case, the OS would still transfer data in small numbers of bytes from or to the
device. But because the I/O operation is interrupt driven, the OS simply works on
other tasks while data is being read from or written to the device. When the OS
recognizes an interrupt from the device, it reads the staniS to check for errors. If
there are none, the OS can supply the next piece of data, for example, by a
sequence of memory-mapped writes. When the last byte of an I/O request has
been transmitted and the I/O operation is completed, the OS ca n inform the pro 
gram. The processor and OS do all the work in this process, accessing the device
and memory for each data item transferred.
Interrupt-driven I/O relieves the processor from having to wa it for every I/O
event, although if we used this method for transferring data from or to a hard
disk, the overhead could still be intolerable, since it could consume a large frac 
tion of the processor when the disk was transferring. For high-bandwidth devices
like hard disks, the transfers consist primarily of relatively large blocks of data