7.3 Measuring and Improving Cache Performance 497
is called direct mapped because there is a direct mapping from any block address in
memory to a single location in the upper level of the hierarchy. There is actually a
whole range of schemes for placing blocks. At one extreme is direct mapped,
where a block ca n be placed in exactly one location.
At the other extreme is a scheme where a block can be placed in any location in
the cache. Such a scheme is called fully associative because a block in memory fullyassociative cache A
cache structure in which a block
may be associated with any entry in the cache. To find a given block in a fullyasso 
can be placed in any location in
ciative cache, all the entries in the cache must be searched because a block can be
the cache.
placed in anyone. To make the sea rch practical, it is done in parallel with a com  
parator associated with each cache entry. These comparators significantly increase
the hardware cost, effectively making fully associative placement practical only for
caches with small numbers of blocks.
The middle range of designs between direct mapped and fully associative is
called set associative. In a set-associative cache, there are a fixed number of set-associative cache Acache
locations (at least two) where each block can be placed; a set-associative cache that has a fixed number ofloca 
tions (at least two) where each
with n locations for a block is called an n-way set-associative cache. An n-way
block can be placed.
set-associative cache consists of a number of sets, each of which consists of n
blocks. Each block in the mem ory maps to a unique set in the cache given by the
index field, and a block can be placed in any element of that set. Thus, a set 
associative placement combines direct-mapped placement and fully associative
placement: a block is directly mapped into a set, and then all the blocks in the
set are searched for a match.
Remember that in a direct-mapped cache, the position of a mem ory block is
given by
(Block number) modulo (Number of cache blocks)
In a set-associative cache, the set containing a memory block is given by
(Block number) modulo (Number of sets in the cache)
Since the block may be placed in any element of the set, all the tags ofall the ele 
ments of the set must be searched. In a fully associative cache, the block can go
anywhere and all tags ofall the blocks in the cache must be searched. For exa mple,
Figure 7. 13 shows where block 12 may be placed in a cache with eight blocks total,
according to the block placement policy fo r direct-mapped, two-way set-associa 
tive, and fully associative caches.
We can think of every block placement strategy as a variation on set asso 
ciativity. Figure 7. 14 shows the possible associativity strucnlfes for an eight-block
cache. A direct-mapped cache is simply a one-way set-associative cache: each