10 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
will be impressed as you correctly use words such as BIOS, DIMM, CPU, cache,
DRAM, ATA, PCI, and many others.
To reinforce how the software and hardware systems used to run a program will
affect performance, we use special section, "Understanding Program Perfor 
:I
mance," throughout the book, with the first one appearing below. These elements
summarize important insights into program performance.
Understanding The performance of a program depends on a combination of the effectiveness of
the algorithms used in the program, the software systems used to create and trans 
Program
late the program into machine instructions, and the effectiveness of the computer
Performance
in executing those instructions, which may include I/O operations. The following
table summarizes how the hardware and software affect performance.
Hardware or software How this component affects Where Is this
component performance topic covered?
Algorithm Detennines both the number of source-level Other books!
statements and the number of I/O operations
executed
Programming language. Detennines the numberof machine instructions Chapters 2 and 3
compiler. and architecture for each source~evel statement
Processor and memory Detennines how fast instructions can be Chapters 5. 6.
system executed and 7
I/O system (hardware and Detennines how fast I/O operations may be Chapter 8
operating system) executed
Check
"Check Yourself" sections are designed to help readers assess whether they have
Yourself comprehended the major concepts introduced in a chapter and understand the
implications of those concepts. Some "Check Yourself" questions have simple
answers; others are for discussion among a group. Answers to the specific ques 
tions can be found at the end of the chapter. "Check Yourself" questions appear
only at the end of a section, making it easy to skip them if you are sure you under 
stand the material.
I. Section 1.1 showed that the number of embedded processors sold every
year greatly outnumbers the number of desktop processors. Can you con 
firm or deny this insight based on your own experience? Try to count the
number of embedded processors in your home. How does it compare with
the number of desktop computers in your home?