224 Chapter 3 Arithmetic: for Computers
Things begin to calm down, despite Intel neglecting to explain why a typical
customer would access floating-point numbers randomly.
• December 12, 1994: IBM Research Division disputes Intel's calculation of the
rate of errors (you can access this article by visiting www.mkp.comlbooks_
catalog/cod/lillks.htm). IBM claims that common spreadsheet programs,
recalculating for 15 minutes a day, could produce Pentium-related errors as
often as once every 24 days. IBM assumes 5000 divides per second, for 15
minutes, yielding 4.2 million divides per day, and does not assume random
distribution of numbers, instead calculating the chances as one in 100 mil 
lion. As a result, IBM immediately stops shipment of all IBM personal com 
puters based on the Pentium. Things heat up again for Intel.
• December 21, 1994: Intel releases the following, signed by Intel's president,
chief executive officer, chief operating officer, and chairman of the board:
"We at Intel wish to sincerely apologize for our handling of the recently pub 
licized Pentium processor flaw. The Intel Inside symbol means that your
computer has a microprocessor second to none in quality and performance.
Thousands of Intel employees work very hard to ensure that this is true. But
no microprocessor is ever perfect. \Vhat Intel continues to believe is techni 
cally an extremely minor problem has taken on a life of its own. Although
Intel firmly stands behind the quality of the current version of the Pentium
processor, we recognize that many users have concerns. \Ve want to resolve
these concerns. Intel will exchange the current version of the Pentium pro 
cessor for an updated version, in which this floating-point divide flaw is cor 
rected, for any owner who requests it, free of charge anytime during the life
of their computer." Analysts estimate that this recall cost Intel $500 million,
and Intel employees did not get a Christmas bonus that year.
This story brings up a few points for everyone to ponder. How much cheaper
would it have been to fix the bug in July 1994? What was the cost to repair the
damage to Intel's reputation? And what is the corporate responsibility in
disclosing bugs in a product so widely used and relied upon as a microprocessor?
In April 1997 another floating-point bug was revealed in the Pentium Pro and
Pentium II microprocessors. When the floating-point-to-integer store instruc 
tions (fi st, fi stp) encounter a negative floating-point number that is too large
to fit in a 16- or 32-bit word after being converted to integer, they set the wrong bit
in the FPO status word (precision exception instead of invalid operation excep 
tion). To Intel's credit, this time they publicly acknowledged the bug and offered a
software patch to get around it-quite a different reaction from what they did in
1994.