7.4 Virtual Memory 533
Of course, this last step will take millions of processor clock cycles (so will the sec 
ond if the replaced page is dirty); accordingly, the operating system will usually
select another process to execute in the processor until the disk access completes.
Because the operating system has saved the state of the process, it can freely give
control of the processor to another process.
\-¥hen the read of the page from disk is complete, the operating system can
restore the state of the process that originally caused the page fault and execute the
instruction that returns from the exception. This instruction will reset the proces 
sor from kernel to user mode, as well as restore the program counter. The user
process then reexecutes the instruction that faulted, accesses the requested page
successfully, and continues execution.
Page fault exceptions for data accesses are difficult to implement properly in a
processor because of a combination of three characteristics:
I. They occur in the middle of instructions, unlike instruction page faults.
2. The instruction cannot be completed before handling the exception.
3. After handling the exception, the instruction must be restarted as if nothing
had occurred.
Making instructions restartable, so that the exception can be handled and the restartable instruction An
instruction that can resume exe 
instruction later continued, is relatively easy in an architecture like the MIPS.
cution after an exception is
Because each instruction writes only one data item and this write occurs at the
resolved without the exception's
end of the instruction cycle, we can simply prevent the instruction from complet 
affecting the result ofthe
ing (by not writing) and restart the instruction at the beginning.
instruction.
For processors with much more complex instructions that may touch many
memory locations and write many data items, making instructions restartable is
much harder. Processing one instruction may generate a number of page faults
in the middle of the instruction. For exa mple, some processors have block move
instructions that touch thousa nds of data words. In such processors, instruc 
tions often cannot be restarted from the beginning, as we do for MIPS instruc 
tions. Instead, the instruction must be interrupted and later continued
midstream in its execution. Resuming an instruction in the middle of its execu 
tion usually requires saving some special state, processing the exception, and
restoring that special state. Making this work properly requires ca reful and
detailed coordination between the exception-handling code in the operating
system and the hardware.
Let's look in more detail at MIPS. When a TLB miss occurs, the MIPS hardware
saves the page number of the reference in a special register called Bild VAdd rand
generates an exception.
The exception invokes the operating system, which handles the miss in software.
handler Name ofa software
Control is transferred to address 8000 Ooo~ex' the location of the TLB miss han  routine invoked to "handle" an
dIer. To find the physical address for the missing page, the TLB miss routine indexes exception or interrupt.