544 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
10%
7%
6%
Miss rate
5%
per type
4%
3%
2%
Capacity
1%
0%
4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Cache size (KB)
FIGURE 7.31 The miss rate can be broken Into three sources of misses. This graph shows
the total miss rate and its components for a range ofcache sizes. This data is for the SPEC2000 integer and
floating-point benchmarks and is from the same source as the data in Figure 7.30. The compulsory miss
component is 0.006% and cannot be seen in this graph. The next component is the capacity miss rate,
which depends on cache size. The conflict portion, which depends both on associativity and on cache size,
is shown for a range of associativities from one-way to eight-way. In each case, the labeled section com,>·
sponds to the increase in the miss rate that occurs when the associativity is changed from the next higher
degree to the labeled degree of associativity. For example, the section labeled fW<rway indicates the addi 
tional misses arising when the cache has associativity of two rather than four. Thus, the difference in the
miss rate incurred by a direct-mapped cache versus a fully associative cache ofthe same size is given by the
swn ofthe sections marked eigllf-wfly.jollr-wfly. two-way, and oue-way.The difference between eight-way
and four-way is so small that it is difficult to see on this graph.
Figure 7.31 shows how the miss rate divides into the three sources. These
sources of misses can be directly attacked by changing some aspect of the cache
design. Since conflict misses arise directly from contention for the same cache
block, increasing associativity reduces conflict misses. Associativity, however, may
slow access time, leading to lower overall performance.
Capacity misses can easily be reduced by enlarging the cache; indeed, second 
level caches have been growing steadily larger for many years. Of course, when we
make the cache larger, we must also be careful about increasing the access time,
which could lead to lower overall performance. Thus, first -level caches have been
growing slowly if at all.