6.9 Advanced Plpellnlng: Extracting More Performance 443
independent of the issue rate or pipeline structure of the processor. In some VLIW
designs, this has not been the case, and recompilation was required when moving
across different processor models; in other static issue processors, code would run
correctly across different implementations, but often so poorly as to make compi 
lation effectively required.
Many superscalars extend the basic framework of dynamic issue decisions to
include dynamic pipeline scheduling. Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses dynamk pipeline
5':heduling Hardware support
which instructions to execute in a given clock cycle while trying to avoid hazards
for reordering the order of
and stalls. Let's start with a simple example of avoiding a data hazard. Consider
instruction execution so as to
the following code sequence:
avoid stalls.
lw Ito . 20($521
addu Itl, ItO. 1t2
sub $s4 , $s4 , $t3
slti $tS , $s4, 20
Even though the sub instruction is ready to execute, it must wa it for the lw and
addu to complete first, which might take many clock cycles if memory is slow.
(Chapter 7 explains caches, the reason that memory accesses are sometimes very
slow.) Dynamic pipeline scheduling allows such hazards to be avoided either fully
or partially.
Dynamic Pipeline Scheduling
Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses which instructions to execute next, possibly
reordering them to avoid stalls. In such processors, the pipeline is divided into
three major units: an instruction fetch and issue unit, multiple functional units
(10 or more in high-end designs in 2004), and a commit unit. Figure 6.49 shows
commit unit The unit in a
the model. The first unit fetches instructions, decodes them, and sends each
dynamic or out-of-order
instruction to a corresponding functional unit for execution. Each functional unit
execution pipeline that decides
has buffers, called reservation stations, that hold the operands and the operation. when it is safe to release the
(In the next section, we will discuss an alternative to reservation stations used by result ofan operation to pro 
many recent processors.) As soon as the buffer contains all its operands and the grammer-visible registers and
memory.
functional unit is ready to execute, the result is calculated. \-¥hen the result is com  
pleted, it is sent to any reservation stations waiting for this particular result as well reservation station Abuffer
as to the commit unit, which buffers the result until it is safe to put the result into within a functional unit that
the register file or, for a store, into memory. The buffer in the commit unit, often holds the operands and the
operation.
called the reorder buffer, is also used to supply operands, in much the same way
as forwarding logic does in a statically scheduled pipeline. Once a result is com   reorder buffer The buffer that
mitted to the register file, it ca n be fetched directly from there, just as in a normal holds results in a dynamically
pipeline. scheduled processor until it is
safe to store the results to mem 
The combination of buffering operands in the reservation stations and results
ory or a register.
in the reorder buffer provides a form of register renaming, just like that used by