548 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
Characteristic Intel Pentium P4 AMDOpteron
Ll cache organization Split instruction and data caches Split instruction and data caches
Ll cache size 8 KB for data, 96 KB trace cache for 64 KB each for instructions/ data
RiSe instructions (12K RISC operations)
Ll cache associativity 4.way set associative 2·way set associative
Ll replacement Approximated LRU replacement LRU replacement
Ll block size 64 bytes 64 bytes
Ll write policy Write.through Write-back
L2 cache organization Unified (instruction and data) Unified (instruction and data)
L2 cache size 512 KB 1024 KB (1 MB)
L2 cache associativity Sway set associative 16.way set associative
L2 replacement Approximated LRU replacement Approximated LRU replacement
L2 block size 128 bytes 64 bytes
L2 write policy Write.tlack Write-back
FIGURE 7.35 First-level and second-level caches In the Intel Pentium P4 and AMD
Opteron. The primary caches in the P4 are physically indexed and tagged; for a discussion of the alterna 
tives,see the Elaboration on page 527.
requested word fi rst on a miss, as described in the Elaboration on page 490. Both
allow the processor to continue to execute instructions that access the data cache
nonblocking (;ache A cache during a cache miss. This technique, called a nonblocking cache, is commonly
that allows the processor to used as designers attempt to hide the cache miss latency by using out-of-order pro 
make references to the cache
cessors. They implement two flavors of nonblocking. Hit under miss allows addi 
while the cache is handling an
tional cache hits during a miss, while miss IInder miss allows multiple outstanding
earlier miss.
cache misses. The aim of the first of these two is hiding some miss latency with
other work, while the aim of the second is overlapping the latency of two different
misses.
Overlapping a large fraction of miss times for multiple outstanding misses
requires a high-bandwidth memory system capable of handling multiple misses in
parallel. In desktop systems, the memory may only be able to take limited advan 
tage of this capability, but large servers and multiprocessors often have memory
systems capable of handling more than one outstanding miss in parallel.
Both microprocessors prefetch instructions and have a built-in hardware
prefetdl mechanism for data accesses. They look at a pattern of data misses and use
this information to try to predict the next address to start fetching the data before
the miss occurs. SUdl techniques generally work best when accessing arrays in loops.
A significant challenge facing cadle designers is to support processors like the P4
and Opteron that can execute more than one memory instruction per dock cyde.
Multiple requests can be supported in the fi rst-level cache by two different tech 
niques. The cadle can be multiported, allowing more than one simultaneous access
to the same cache block. Multiported caches, however, are often too expensive, since