4.5 Fallacies and Pitfalls 267
The execution time of the program after I make the improvement is given by
the following simple equation known as Amdahl's law: Amdahl's law A rule stating
that the performance
Execution time after improvement
enhancement possible with a
given improvement is limited by
Execution time affected by improvement + Execution time unaffected)
the amount that the improved
(
Amount of improvement
feature is used.
For this problem:
Execution time after improvement = 80 seconds + (100 _ 80 seconds)
n
Since we want the performance to be five times faster, the new execution time
should be 20 seconds, giving
20 seconds = 80 seconds + 20 seconds
"
80 seconds
0=
n
That is, there is no amOll1lt by which we can enhance multiply to achieve a fivefold
increase in performance, if multiply accounts for only 80% of the workload. The
performance enhancement possible with a given improvement is limited by the
amount that the improved feature is used.
This concept also yields what we call the law of diminishing returns in everyday
life. \¥e can use Amdahl's law to estimate performance improvements when we
know the time consumed for some function and its potential speed up. Amdahl's
law, together with the CPU performance equation, are handy tools for evaluating
potential enhancements. Amdahl's law is explored in more detail in the exercises
II
and in the In More Depth: Amdal's Law on the CD.
A common theme in hardware design is a corollary of Amdahl's law: Make the
common case fast. This simple guideline reminds us that in many cases the fre 
quency with which one event occurs may be much higher than another. Amdahl's
law reminds us that the opportunity for improvement is affected by how much
time the event consumes. Thus, making the common case fast will tend to
enhance performance better than optimizing the rare case. Ironically, the com 
mon case is often simpler than the rare case and hence is often easier to enhance.
Pitfall: Using a subset ofthe performance equation as a performance metric.
We have already shown the fallacy of predicting performance based on simply one
of clock rate, instruction count, or CPI. Another common mistake is to use two of
the three factors to compare performance. Although using two of the three factors
may be valid in a limited context, it is also easily misused. Indeed, nea rly all pro 
posed alternatives to the use of time as the performance metric have led evennlally
to misleading claims, distorted results, or incorrect interpretations.