Glossary G-5
die The individual rectangular sections don't-care term An element of a logical
that are cut from a wafer, more informally function in which the output does not de 
known as chips. pend on the values of all the inputs. Don't 
DIMM (dual inline memory module) A care terms maybe specified in different ways.
small board that contains DRAM chips on double precision A floating-point value
both sides. SIMMs have DRAMs on only represented in two 32-bit words.
one side. Both DlMMs and SIMMs are dynamic branch prediction Prediction of
meant to be plugged into memory slots, branches at runtime using runtime infor 
usually on a motherboard. mation.
direct memoryaccess (DMA) A mechanism dynamic multiple issue An approach to
that provides a device controller the abilityto implementing a multiple-issue processor
transfer data directly to or from the memory where many decisions are made during exe 
without involving the processor. cution by the processor.
direct-mapped cache A cache structure in dynamic pipeline scheduling Hardware
which each memory location is mapped to support for reordering the order of instruc 
exactly one location in the cache. tion execution so as to avoid stalls.
directory A repository for information on dynamic random access memory
the state of every block in main memory, in  (DRAM) Memory built as an integrated
cluding which caches have copies of the circuit, it provides random access to any
block, whether it is dirty, and so on. Used location.
for cache coherence. edge-triggered d ocking A clocking
dispatch An operation in a micropro  scheme in which all state changes occur on
grammed control unit in which the next mi  a clock edge.
croinstruction isselected on thebasisofoneor embedded computer A computer inside
more fields of a macroinstruction, usually by another device used for running one pre 
creatingatablecontainingtheaddresses ofthe determined application or collection of
target microinstmctions and indexing the ta  software.
ble using a field of the macroinstmction. The error-detecting code A code that enables
dispatch tables are typically implemented in the detection ofan error in data, but not the
ROM or programmable logic array (PLA). precise location,and hence correction of the
The term dispatch is also used in dynamically error.
scheduled processors to refer to the process of Ethernet A computer network whose
sending an instruction to a queue. length is limited to about a kilometer. Orig 
distributed memory Physical memory that inally capable of transferring up to 10 mil 
is divided into modules, with some placed lion bits per second, nelver versions can run
near each processor in a multiprocessor. up to 100 million bits per second and even
distributed shared memory (DSM) A 1000 million bits per second. It treats the
memory scheme that uses addresses to access wire like a bus with multiple masters and
remote data when demanded rather than re  uses collision detection and a back-off
trieving the data in case it might be used. scheme for handling simultaneous accesses.
dividend A number being divided. exception Also called interrupt. An un 
divisor A number that the dividend is di  scheduled event that disrupts program exe 
vided by. cution; used to detect overflow.