450 Chapter 6 Enhancing Performance with Plpellnlng
register renaming to remove antidependences. Register renaming requires the processor
to maintain a map between the architectural registers and the physical registers, indicat 
ing which physical register is the most current copy of an architectural register. By keeping
track of the renamings that have occurred, register renaming offers another approach to
recovery in the event of incorrect speculation: simply undo the mappings that have
occurred since the first incorrectly speculated instruction. This will cause the state of the
processor to return to the last correctly executed instruction, keeping the correct mapping
between the architectural and physical registers.
Understanding The Pentium 4 combines a deep pipeline (averaging 20 or more pipe stages per
instruction) and aggressive multiple issue to achieve high performance. By keep 
Program
ing the latencies for back-to-back operations low (0 for ALU operations and 2 for
Performance
loads), the impact of data dependences is reduced. What are the most serious
potential performance bottlenecks for programs running on this processor? The
following list includes some potential performance problems, the last three of
which can apply in some fo rm to any high-performance pipelined processor.
• The use of IA-32 instructions that do not map to three or fewer simple mi 
crooperations
• Branches that are difficult to predict,causing misprediction stalls and restarts
when speculation fails
• Poor instruction locality, which causes the trace cache not to function effec 
tively
• Long dependences-typically caused by long-running instructions or data
cache misses-which lead to stalls
Performance delays arising in accessing memory (see Chapter 7) that cause the
processor to stall
Check Are the following statements true or false?
Yourself
1. The Pentium 4 can issue more instructions per clock then the Pentium III.
2. The Pentium 4 multiple-issue pipeline directly executes IA-32 instructions.
3. The Pentium 4 uses dynamic scheduling but no speculation.
4. The Pentium 4 microarchitecture has many more registers than IA-32
reqUIres.
5. The Pentium 4 pipeline has fewer stages than the Pentium II I.
6. The trace cache in the Pentium 4 is exactly the same as an instruction cache.