G-6 Glossary
exception enable Also called intermpt en  flip-flop A memory element for which the
able. A signal or action that controls wheth  output is equal to the value of the stored state
er the process responds to an exception or inside the element and for which the internal
not; necessary for preventing the occur  state is changed only on a clock edge.
rence of exceptions during intervals before floating point Computer arithmetic that
the processor has safely saved the state represents numbers in which the binary
needed to restart. point is not fixed.
executable file A functional program in the floppy disk A portable form of secondary
format of an object file that contains no un  memory composed of a rotating mylar plat 
resolved references, relocation information, ter coated with a magnetic recording
symbol table, or debugging information. materiaL
exponent In the numerical representation flush (instructions) To discard instruc 
system of floating-point arithmetic, the val  tions in a pipeline, usually due to an unex 
ue that is placed in the eAvonent field. pected event.
external label Also called global labeLA la  formal parameter A variable that is the ar 
bel referring to an object that can be refer  gument to a procedure or macro; replaced by
enced from files other than the one in which that argument once the macro is eAl'anded.
it is defined. forward reference A label that is used be 
false sharing A sharing situation in which fore it is defined.
two unrelated shared variables are located in forwarding Also called bypassing. A meth 
the same cache block and the full block is ex  od of resolving a data hazard by retrieving the
changed between processors even though the missing data element from internal buffers
processors are accessing different variables. rather than waiting for it to arrive from
field programmable devices (FPD) An in  programmer-visible registers or mem ory.
tegrated circuit containing combinational fraction The value, generally between 0
logic, and possibly memory devices, that is and 1, placed in the fraction field.
configurable by the end user. frame pointer A value denoting the loca 
field programmable gate array A config  tion of the saved registers and local variables
urable integrated circuit containing both for a given procedure.
combinational logic blocks and flip-flops. fully associative cache A cache structure in
finite state machine A sequential logic which a block can be placed in any location
function consisting of a set of inputs and in the cache.
outputs, a next-state function that maps the fully connected network A network that
current state and the inputs to a nelV state, connects processor-memory nodes by sup 
and an output function that maps the plying a dedicated communication link be 
current state and possibly the inputs to a set tween every node.
of asserted outputs. gate A device that implements basic logic
firmware Microcode implemented in a functions, such as AND or O R.
mem ory structure, typically ROM or RAM. general-purpose register (GPR) A register
flat panel display, liquid crystal display A that can be used for addresses or for data
display technology using a thin layer ofliquid with virtually any instruction.
polymers that can be used to transmit or block global miss rate The fraction of references
light according to whether a charge is applied. that miss in all levels of a multilevel cache.