2.4 Representing instructions in the Computer 63
MIPS Fields
MIPS fields are given names to make them easier to discuss:
op ct cd srta mt f llnct
6 bits 5 bits 5 bits 5 bits 5 bits 6 bits
Here is the meaning of each name of the fields in MIPS instructions:
• op: Basic operation of the instruction, traditionally called the apcade. opcode The field that denotes
the operation and format of an
• rs: The first register source operand.
instruction.
• rt: The second register source operand.
• rd: The register destination operand. It gets the result of the operation.
• shamt: Shift amount. (Section 2.5 explains shift instructions and this term;
it will not be used until then, and hence the field contains zero.)
• funct: Function. This field selects the specific variant of the operation in the
op field and is sometimes called the function code.
A problem occurs when an instruction needs longer fields than those shown
above. For example, the load word instruction must specify two registers and a
constant. If the address were to use one of the 5-bit fields in the format above, the
5
constant within the load word instruction would be limited to only 2 or 32. This
constant is used to select elements from arrays or data structures, and it often
needs to be much larger than 32. This 5-bit field is too small to be useful.
Hence, we have a conflict between the desire to keep all instructions the same
length and the desire to have a single instruction format. This leads us to the final
hardware design principle:
Design Principle 4: Good design demands good compromises.
The compromise chosen by the MIPS designers is to keep all instructions the
same length, thereby requiring different kinds of instruction formats for different
kinds of instructions. For example, the format above is called R-type (for register)
or R-format. A second type of instruction format is called I-type (for immediate)
or I-format and is used by the immediate and data transfer instructions. The fields
ofl -format are
op ct const ant or addr ess
6 bits 5 bits 5 bits 16 bits