220 Chapter 3 Arithmetic: for Computers
Floating-point perfo rmance of the IA-32 family has traditionally lagged faf
behind other com puters. Whether it is simply a lack of attention by Intel engineers
o r a flaw with its architecture is hard to know. We can say that many new architec 
tures have been announced since 1980, and none have followed in Intel's foot 
steps. In addition, Intel created a more traditional floating-point architecture as
part of SSE2.
The Intel Streaming SIMD Extension 2 (SSE2) Floating 
Point Architecture
Chapter 2 notes that in 200 1 Intel added 144 instructions to its architecture,
including double precision floating-point registers and operations. It includes
eight registers that can be used fo r floating-point operands, giving the compiler a
different target for floating-point operations than the unique stack architecture.
Compilers can choose to use the eight SSE2 registers as floating-point registers
like those found in other computers. AMD expanded the number to 16 as part of
AMD64, which Intel relabled EM64T for its use.
In addition to holding a single precision o r double precision number in a regis 
ter, Intel allows multiple floating-point operands to be packed into a single 128 
bit SSE2 register: four single precision o r two double precision. If the operands
can be arranged in memory as 128-bit aligned data, then 128-bit data transfers
can load and sto re multiple operands per instruction. This packed floating-point
format is supported by arithmetic operations that can operate simultaneously on
four singles o r two doubles. This new architecture can mo re than double perfor 
mance over the stack architecture.
Thus mathematics may be
defined as the subject in
Fallacies and Pitfalls
which we never know what
we are talking abollt, nor
whether what we are saying
Arithmetic fallacies and pitfalls generally stem from the difference between the
is truc.
limited precision of computer arithmetic and the unlimited precision of natural
Bertrand Russell, Recent
arithmetic.
Words the Principles of
011
+ + + +
Mathematics, 1901 Fallacy: Floating-point addition is associative; that is, x (y z) = (x y) z.
Given the great range of numbers that can be represented in floating point, prob 
lems occur when adding two large numbers of opposite signs plus a small number.