250 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
BIG
Figure 4.2 shows the basic measurements at different levels in the computer
The
and what is being measured in each case. We can see how these factors are
Picture combined to yield execution time measu red in seconds per program:
" Seconds Instructions Clock cycles -,;S"""o"n,d~',""
Tline = = X - x-;.
Program Program Instruction Clock cycle
Always bear in mind that the only complete and reliable measure of
computer performance is time. For example, changing the instruction set
to lower the instruction count may lead to an organization with a slower
clock cycle time that offsets the improvement in instruction count. Simi 
larly, because CPI depends on type of instructions executed, the code that
executes the fewest number of instructions may not be the fastest.
Components of performance Units of measure
CPU execution time for a program Se<:onds for the program
Instruction count Instructions eXe<:uted for the program
Clock cycles per instruction (CPI) Average number of clock cycles per instruction
Clock cycle time Se<:onds per clock cycle
FIGURE 4.2 The basic components of performance and how each Is measured.
on the architecture, but not on the exact implementation, we can measure the
instruction count without knowing all the details of the implementation. The
CPI, however, depends on a wide variety of design details in the computer, includ 
ing both the memory system and the processor structure (as we will see in Chap 
ters 5, 6, and 7), as well as on the mix of instruction types executed in an
application. Thus, CPI varies by application, as well as among implementations
with the same instruction set.
Designers often obtain CPI by a detailed simulation of an implementation or by
using hardware counters, when a CPU is operational. Sometimes it is possible to com 
pute the CPU clock cycles by looking at the different types of instructions and using
their individual clock cycle counts. In cases, the following formula is useful:
SUdl
L
"
CPU clock cycles = (CPI XCi)
i
; '" I