G-13
Glossary
memory accesses, I/O activities, operating send message routine A routine used by a
system overhead, CPU execution time, and processor in machines with private memo 
so on. ries to pass to another processor.
restartableinstruction An instmction that sensitivity list The list of signals that spec 
can resume execution after an exception is ifies when an always block should be
resolved without the exception's affecting reevaluated.
the result of the instruction. separate compilation Splitting a program
return address A link to thecalling sitethat across many files, each of which can be
allows a procedure to retum to the proper compiled without knowledge ofwhat is in
address; in MIPSit is stored in register $r a. the other files.
rotation latency Also called delay. The sequential logic A group oflogic elements
time required for the desired sector of a disk that contain memory and hence whose val 
to rotate under the read/write head; usually ue depends on the inputs as well as the cur 
assumed to be halfthe rotation time. rent contents of the memory.
round Method to make the intermediate Server A computer used for mnning larger
floating-point result fit the floating-point programs for multiple users often simulta 
format; the goal is typically to find the near  neously and typically accessed only via a
est number that can be represented in the network.
format. set-associative cache A cache that has a
scientific notation A notation that renders fixed number oflocations (at least two)
numbers with a single digit to the left ofthe where each block can be placed.
decimal point. set-up time The minimum time that the
secondary memory Nonvolatile memory input to a memory device must be valid be 
used to store programs and data between fore the clock edge.
mns; typically consists ofmagnetic disks in shared memory A memory for a parallel
today's computers. processor with a single address space, im 
sector One ofthe segm ents that make up a plying implicit communication with loads
track on a magnetic disk; a sector is the and stores.
smallest amount ofinformation that is read sign-extend To increase the size ofa data
or written on a disk. item by replicating the high-order sign bit
seek The process ofpositioning a read/write of the original data item in the high-order
head over the proper track on a disk. bits ofthe larger, destination data item.
segmentation A variable-size address silicon A natural element which is a semi 
mapping scheme in which an address con  conductor.
sists oftwo parts: a segment number, which silicon crystal ingot A rod composed of a
is mapped to a physical address, and a seg  silicon crystal that is between 6 and 12 inch 
ment offset. es in diameter and about 12 to 24 inches
selector value Also called control value. long.
The control signal that is used to select one simple programmable logic device
ofthe input values ofa multiplexor as the (SPLD) Programmablelogic device usually
output ofthe multiplexor. containing either a single PAi or PLA.
semiconductor A substance that does not single precision A floating-point value
conduct electricity welL represented in a single 32-bit word.