240 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to measure, report, and summarize performance and
describes the major factors that determine the performance of a computer. A pri 
mary reason for examining performance is that hardware performance is often
key to the effectiveness of an entire system of hardware and software. Much of the
material in this chapter, especially this section and the next, will be critical to
understanding the next three chapters. The rest of the chapter provides important
insights and principles that anyone seeking to evaluate the performance of a com 
puter system should know. The material in Sections 4.3-4.5, however, is not nec 
essary for the immediately following chapters and can be returned to later.
Assessing the performance of such a system can be quite challenging. The scale
and intricacy of modern software systems, together with the wide range of perfor 
mance improvement techniques employed by hardware designers, have made per 
formance assessment much more difficult. It is simply impossible to sit down with
an instruction set manual and a significant software system and determine, simply
by analysis, how fast the software will run on the computer. In fact, for different
types of applications, different performance metrics may be appropriate, and dif 
ferent aspects of a computer system may be the most significant in determining
overall performance.
Of course, in trying to choose among different computers, performance is
almost always an important attribute. Accurately measuring and comparing dif 
ferent computers is critical to purchasers, and therefore to designers. The people
selling computers know this as well. Often, salespeople would like you to see their
computer in the best possible light, whether or not this light accurately reflects the
needs of the purchaser's application. In some cases, claims are made about com 
puters that don't provide useful insight for any real applications. Hence, under 
standing how best to measure performance and the limitations of performance
measurements is important in selecting a computer.
Our interest in performance, however, goes beyond issues of assessing
performance only from the outside of a computer. To understand why a piece of
software performs as it does, why one instruction set can be implemented to per 
form better than another, or how some hardware feature affects performance, we
need to understand what determines the performance of a computer. For exa m 
ple, to improve the performance of a software system, we may need to understand
what factors in the hardware contribute to the overall system performance and the
relative importance of these factors. These factors may include how well the pro 
gram uses the instructions of the computer, how well the underlying hardware