88 Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
leads to a "memory leak" which eventually uses up so much memory that the oper 
ating system may crash. Freeing space too early leads to a "dangling pointers," which
can cause pointers to point to things that the program never intended.
Figure 2.18 summarizes the register conventions for the MIPS assembly
language. Figures 2.19 and 2.20 summarize the parts of the MIPS assembly instruc 
tions described so far and the corresponding MIPS machine instmctions.
Elaboration: What if there are more than four parameters? The MIPS convention is
to place the extra parameters on the stack just above the frame pointer. The procedure
then expects the first four parameters to be in registers $aO through $il3 and the rest
in memory, addressable via the frame pointer.
As mentioned in the caption of Figure 2.16, the frame pointer is convenient because
all references to variables in the stack within a procedure will have the same offset.
The frame pointer is not necessary, however. The GNU MIPS C compiler uses a frame
pointer, but the C compiler from MIPS/Silicon Graphics does not; it uses register 30 as
another save register ($s8).
j a1 actually saves the address of the instruction that follows j ill into register $ra,
thereby allowing a procedure return to be simply j r $ril .
Check
Which of the following statements about C and Java are generally true?
Yourself
I. Procedure calls in C are faster than method invocation in Java.
2. C programmers manage data explicitly while it's automatic in Java.
3. C leads to more pointer bugs and memory leak bugs than does Java.
4. C passes parameters in registers while Java passes them on the stack.
• Preserved on
Register number call?
$zero 0 the constant value 0 n.a.
hO-h I 2-3 values for results and expression evaluation 0"
$ilO-$a3 4- 7 arguments 00
$tO-$t7 8-15 temporaries 00
$sO-$s7 16-23 saved y"
$tB--$t9 24- 25 more temporaries 00
$gp 28 global pointer ""
$'p 29 stack pointer ""
Ifp 30 frame pointer y"
$co 31 return address y"
FIGURE 2.18 MIPS register conventions. Register I, called $dt, is reserved for the assembler (see
Section 2.10), and registers 26--27, called $kO- $k1, are reserved for the operating system.