594
Chapter 8
(hundreds to thousands of bytes). Thus, computer designers invented a mecha 
nism for offioading the processor and having the device controller transfer data
directly to or from the memory without involving the processor. This mechanism
direct memory access (DMA) is called direct memory access (OMA). The interrupt mechanism is still used by
A mechanism that provides a
the device to communicate with the processor, but only on completion of the I/O
device controller the ability to
transfer or when an error occurs.
transfer data directly to or from
DMA is implemented with a specialized controller that transfers data between
the memory without involving
an I/O device and memory independent of the processor. The DMA controller
the processor.
becomes the bus master and directs the reads or writes between itself and mem 
bus master A unit on the bus
ory. There are three steps in a DMA transfer:
that can initiate bus requests.
I. The processor sets up the DMA by supplying the identity of the device, the
operation to perform on the device, the memory address that is the source
or destill3tion of the data to be transferred, and the number of bytes to
transfer.
2. The DMA starts the operation on the device and arbitrates for the bus.
When the data is available (from the device or memory), it transfers the
data. The DMA device supplies the memory address for the read or the
write. If the request requires more than one transfer on the bus, the DMA
unit generates the next memory address and initiates the next transfer.
Using this mechanism, a DMA unit can complete an entire transfer, which
may be thousands of bytes in length, without bothering the processor.
Many DMA controllers contain some memory to allow them to deal flexi 
bly with delays either in transfer or those incurred while waiting to become
bus master.
3. Once the DMA transfer is complete, the controller interrupts the processor,
which can then determine by interrogating the DMA device or examining
memory whether the entire operation completed successfully.
There may be multiple DMA devices in a computer system. For example, in a
system with a single processor-memory bus and multiple I/O buses, each I/O bus
controller will often contain a DMA processor that handles any transfers between
a device on the I/O bus and the memory.
Unlike either polling or interrupt-driven I/O, DMA can be used to interface a
hard disk without consuming all the processor cycles for a single I/O. Of course, if
the processor is also contending for memory, it will be delayed when the memory
is busy doing a DMA transfer. By using caches, the processor can avoid having to
access memory most of the time, thereby leaving most of the memory bandwidth
free for use by I/O devices.
Elaboration: To further reduce the need to interrupt the processor and occupy it in
handling an I/O request that may involve doing several actual operations. the I/O con 
troller can be made more intelligent. Intelligent controllers are often called I/O proces-