Computers
Moving People Faster
in the
and More Safely
Real World
Problem: Find ways to help transport people curves, can be unsafe at the higher speeds;
quickly while maintaining safety, comfort, and since the TGV was designed to run on existing
efficiency. track, finding a fail-safe method to communi 
cate track conditions was critical.
Solution: For more than 20 years, computers The TGV designers solved this problem by a
have played an increasingly important role in the clever signaling system, called TVM ( Transmis 
control of transportation systems including sioll Voie-Machine), that runs through the rails
planes, trains, automobiles, and even ships. Essen  and is picked up by antennas in the locomotive.
tially aU modern transportation systems rely on The track is divided into blocks, which are typi 
computers to enhance their safety, comfort, and cally about 1.5 krn in le ngth. Shorter blocks are
efficiency. Computers also play a critical role in used when track conditions change quickly or
improving fuel consumption and reducing air where a higher degree of safety is critical, such
pollution. In these two pages, we examine some of as in the Chunnel, where the block length is
the uses of computers in trains and automobiles. about one-tenth as long. Transmitters at the
In designing pipelines we must prevent hazards,at beginning of each block are used to communi 
aUcosts, and we try to avoid pipeline delays. Com  cate instructions to the cab, where they are car 
puter-controlled trains try to do the same: hazards ried out by an engineer; a computer also
are life-threatening and can never be permitted, watches the communications, and implements
and delays are to be avoided! the commands if the engineer fails to.
a
The French TGV ( Train Gra nde Vitesse) is
o ne of the fastest train systems in the world,
with a typical top speed of 300 km/hour. Tra 
ditionally, trains were controlled by an engi 
neer, using a set of track-side lights and signals
that tell the engineer to proceed , slow down,
or stop. At 300 km/hour, it is difficult to read
such signals, and easy to miss one completely,
leading to a possible disaster. In addition,
some tracks, such as those containing tight The Eurostar TGY train In Nice, France.