36 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
Chapter 6 describes how processor pipelining exploits parallelism, and Chapter 7
describes how the memory hierarchy exploits locality. The remaining chapters
provide the introduction and the conclusion to this material. Chapter 2 describes
instruction sets- the interfa ce between compilers and the machine-a nd empha 
sizes the role ofcompilers and programming languages in using the features ofthe
instruction set. Chapter 3 describes how computers perform arithmetic opera 
tions and handle arithmetic data. Chapter 4 covers performance and thus
describes how to evaluate the whole computer. Chapter 9 describes multiproces 
sors and is included on the CD. Appendix B, also on the CD, discusses logic
design.
An activefield ofscience is
like immense anthill; the
all
individual almost vanishes
Historical Perspective and Further
i1lto the mass ofminds tum 
bling over each other, carry  Reading
ing information from place
to place, passing itaround at
For each chapter in the text, a section devoted to a historical perspective can be
the speed oflight.
found on the CD that accompanies this book. We may trace the development of
Lewis Thomas,"Natural an idea through a series of machines or describe some important projects, and we
Science:' in The Lives ofa Cell,
provide references in case you are interested in probing further.
1974
The historical perspective for this chapter provides a background for some of
the key ideas presented in this opening chapter. Its purpose is to give you the
human story behind the technological advances and to place achievements in
their historical context. By understanding the past, you may be better able to
understand the forces that will shape computing in the future. Each historical per 
spectives section on the CD ends with suggestions for further reading, which are
also collected separately on the CD under the section "Further Reading." The rest
'II
of this Section 1.7 is on the CD.
Exercises
The relative time ratings of exercises are shown in square brackets after each exer 
cise number. On average, an exercise rated (10 ) will take you twice as long as one
rated [5J . Sections of the text that should be read before attempting an exercise
will be given in angled brackets; for example, <ยง 1.2> means you should have read
Section 1.3, "Under the Covers;' to help you solve this exercise. If the solution to
an exercise depends on others, they will be listed in curly brackets; for example,
{Ex.I.I } mea ns that you should answer Exercise 1.1 before trying this exercise.
II
In More Depth Exercises introduce a new topic or explore a topic in more
detail. Such exercises include sufficient background to understand the concepts, as