6 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
or persollal digital assistant, the computers in a video game or digital television,
and the networks of processors that control a modern airplane or cargo ship.
Embedded computing systems are designed to run one application or one set of
related applications, which is normally integrated with the hardware and delivered
as a single system; thus, despite the large number of embedded computers, most
users never really see that they are using a computer!
Embedded applications often have unique application requirements that com 
bine a minimum performance with stringent limitations on cost or power. For
example, consider a cell phone: the processor need only be as fast as necessary to
handle its limited function, and beyond that, minimizing cost and power are the
most important objectives. Despite their low cost, embedded computers often
have the least tolera nce for fa ilure, since the results ca n vary from upsetting (when
your new television crashes) to devastating (such as might occur when the com 
puter in a plane or car crashes). In consumer-oriented embedded applications,
such as a digital home appliance, dependability is achieved primarily through
simplicity-the emphasis is on doing one function, as perfectly as possible. In
large embedded systems, techniques of redundancy, which are used in servers, are
often employed. Although this book focuses on general-purpose computers, most
of the concepts apply directly, or with slight modifications, to embedded comput 
ers. In several places, we will touch on some of the unique aspects of embedded
computers.
Figure 1.1 shows that during the last several years, the growth in the number of
embedded computers has been much faster (40% compounded annual growth
rate) than the growth rate among desktop computers and servers (9% annually).
Note that the embedded computers include cell phones, video garnes, digital TVs
and set-top boxes, personal digital assistants, and a variety of such consumer
devices. Note that this data does not include low-end embedded control devices
that use 8-bit and 16-bit processors.
Elaboration: Elaborations are short sections used throughout the text to provide
more detail on a particular subject, which may be of interest. Disinterested readers
may skip over an elaboration, since the subsequent material will never depend on the
contents of the elaboration.
Many embedded processors are designed using processor cores, a version of a pro 
cessor written in a hardware description language such as Verilog or VHDL. The core
allows a designer to integrate other application-specific hardware with the processor
core for fabrication on a single chip. The availability of synthesis tools that can gener 
ate a chip from a Verilog specification, together with the capacity of modern silicon
chips, has made such special-purpose processors highly attractive. Since the core can
be synthesized for different semiconductor manufacturing lines, using a core provides
flexibility in choosing a manufacturer as well. In the last few years, the use of cores has