Glossary
instruction-level parallelism The parallel  latency (pipeline) The number ofstages in
ism among instructions. a pipeline or the number of stages between
integrated circuit Also called chip.A device two instructions during execution.
combining dozens to millions of transistors. least recently used (LRU) A replacement
interrupt An exception that comes from schemeinwhich the block replaced is theone
outsideof the processor. (Some architectures that has been unused for the longest time.
use the teon interrupt for all exceptions.) least significant bit The rightmost bit in a
interrupt-driven 110 An I/O scheme that MIPS word.
employs interrupts to indicate to the pro  level-sensitive d ocking A timing method 
cessor that an I/O device needs attention. ology in which state changes occur at either
interrupt handler A piece ofcode that is run high or low clock levels but are not instanta 
as a result of an exception or an interrupt. neous, as such changes are in edge-triggered
issue packet The set of instructions that is  designs.
sues together in 1 d ock cycle; the packet linker Also called link editor. A systems
may be determined statically by the compil  program that combines independently as 
er or dynamically by the processor. sembled machine language programs and
issue slots The positions from which in  resolves all undefined labels into an execut 
structions could issue in a given d ock cycle; able file.
by analogy these correspond to positions at loader A systems program that places an
the starting blocks for a sprint. object program in main memoryso that it is
Java bytecode Instruction from an instruc  ready to execute.
tion set designed to interpret Java programs. load-store machine Also called register 
Java Virtual Machine OVM) The program register machine. An instruction set archi 
that interprets Java bytecodes. tecture in which all operations are benveen
jump address table Also called jump table. registers and data memory may only be ac 
A table of addresses of alternative instruc  cessed via loads or stores.
tion sequences. load-use data hazard A specific form of
jump-and-link instruction An instruction data hazard in which the data requested by
that jumps to an address and simultaneous  a load instruction has not yet become avail 
ly saves the address of the following instruc  able when it is requested.
tion in a register ($ r a in MIPS). local area network (LAN) A network de 
Just In Tinle Compiler (JIT) The name com  signed to carry data within a geographically
monly given to a compiler that operates at confined area, typically within a single
runtime, translating the interpreted code seg  building.
ments into the native code of the computer. local label A label referring to an object
kernel mode Also called supervisor mode. that can be used only within the file in
A mode indicating that a running process is which it is defined.
an operating system process. local miss rate The fraction of references to
latch A memory element in which the out  one level of a cache that miss; used in multi 
put is equal to the value of the stored state level hierarchies.
inside the element and the state is changed lock A synchronization device that allows
whenever the appropriate inputs change access to data to only one processor at a
and the d ock is asserted. time.