318 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
ity of a pipelined processor. For those, who want to understand how the hardwa re
really implements the control, forge ahead!
Check
Look at the control signal in Figure 5.22 on page 312. Can any control signal in
Yourself the figure be replaced by the inverse of another? (Hint: Take into account the don't
cares.) If so, can you use one signal for the other without adding an inverter?
A Multicycle Implementation
In an earlier example, we broke each instruction into a series of steps corresponding
to the functional unit operations that were needed. We can use these steps to create a
multicyd e multicyde implementation. In a multicycle implementation, each step in the exe 
implem entation Also called cution will take I clock cycle. The multicycle implementation allows a functional
multiple dock cyde implem en 
unit to be used more than once per instruction, as long as it is used on different
tation. An implementation in
clock cycles. This sharing can help reduce the amount of hardware required. The
which an instruction is executed
ability to allow instructions to take different numbers of clock cycles and the ability
in multiple dock cydes.
to share functional units within the execution of a single instruction are the major
advantages of a multicycle design. Figure 5.25 shows the abstract version of the mul-
Instruction
register -
PC Address Data f- A ~
-
Register #
Instruction
or data Registers ) ALU ALUOut
Memory
Register # r-
1/
f- B
Memory
Data data '---
Register #
register
FIGURE 5.25 11Ie high-level view of the multlcycle datapath. This picture shows the key elements of the
datapath: a shared memory unit,a singleALU shared among instructions, and the connections among these shared lUlits.The
use of shared rrUlctionallUlits requires the addition or widening of multiplexors as well as new temporary registers that hold
data between dock cycles of the same instruction. The additional registers are the Instruction register (IR), the Memory data
register (MDR),A, B,and AWOUl.