332 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Multiplexor controls are slightly different, since they select one of the inputs
whether they are 0 or 1. Thus, in the finite state machine, we always specify the
setting of all the multiplexor controls that we care about. When we implement the
finite state machine with logic, setting a control to 0 may be the default and thus
may not require any gates. A simple exam ple of a finite state machine appears in
Appendix B, and if you are unfamiliar with the concept of a finite state machine,
1£
you may want to examine Appendix B before proceeding.
The finite state control essentially corresponds to the five steps of execution
shown on pages 325 through 329; each state in the finite state machine will take 1
clock cycle. The finite state machine will consist of several parts. Since the first two
steps of execution are identical for every instruction, the initial two states of the
finite state machine will be common for all instructions. Steps 3 through 5 differ,
depending on the opcode. After the execution of the last step for a particular
instruction class, the finite state machine will return to the initial state to begin
fetching the next instruction.
Figure 5.31 shows this abstracted representation of the finite state machine. To
fill in the details of the finite state machine, we will first expand the instruction
fetch and decode portion, and then we will show the states (and actions) for the
different instruction classes.
We show the first two states of the finite state machine in Figure 5.32 using a
traditional graphic representation. We number the states to simplify the explana 
tion, though the numbers are arbitrary. State 0, corresponding to step 1, is the
starting state of the machine.
The signals that are asserted in each state are shown within the circle represent 
ing the state. The arcs between states define the next state and are labeled with
Start
I
I
Instruction fetch/decode and register fetch
(Figure 5.32)
Memory access R-type instructions Branch instruction Jump instruction
instructions (Figure 5.34) (Rgure 5.35) (Figure 5.36)
(Figure 5.33)
FIGURE 5.31 The high-level view of the finite state machine control. The first steps are inde 
pendent ofthe instruction class; then a series ofsequences that depend on the instruction opcode are used
to complete each instruction class. After completing the actions needed for that instruction class, the con 
trol returns to fetch a new instruction. Each box in this figure may represent one to several states. The arc
labeled Start m.uks the stale in which to begin when the first instruction is to be fetched.