2.4 Representing instructions in the Computer 61
Translating a MIPS Assembly Instruction into a Machine Instruction
Let's do the next step in the refinement of the MIPS language as an example. EXAMPLE
We'll show the real MIPS language version of the instruction represented
symbolically as
add $tO,$sl,$s2
first as a combination of decimal numbers and then of binary numbers.
The decimal representation is ANSWER
o o
17 18 8 32
Eadl of these segm ents of an instruction is called a fie/d. The first and last fields
(containing 0 and 32 in this case) in combination tell the MIPS computer that
this instruction performs addition. The second field gives the number of the reg 
ister that is the first source operand of the addition operation (17 = $s 1), and the
third field gives the other source operand for the addition (18 = $s 2).The fourth
field contains the number of the register that is to receive the sum (8 = $to).The
fifth field is unused in this instruction, so it is set to O. Thus, this instruction adds
register $s 1 to register $s 2 and places the sum in register $to.
This instruction can also be represented as fields of binary numbers as op 
posed to decimal:
000000 10001 10010 01000 00000 100000
6 bits 5 bits 5 bits 5 bits 5 bits 6 bits
To distinguish it from assembly language, we call the numeric version of
machine language Binary rep 
instructions machine language and a sequence of such instructions machine code.
resentation used for communi 
This layout of the instruction is called the instruction format. As you can see
cation within a computer
from counting the number of bits, this MIPS instruction takes exactly 32 bits  system.
the same size as a data word. In keeping with our design principle that simplicity
instruction format A form of
favors regularity, all MIPS instructions are 32 bits long.
representation ofan instruction
It would appear that you would now be reading and writing long, tedious strings of
composed offields ofbinary
binary numbers. We avoid that tedium by using a higher base than binary that con- numbers.