598 Chapter 8
Transaction Processing I/O Benchmarks
transaction processing A type Transaction processing (TP) applications involve both a response time require 
of application that involves han  ment and a performance measurement based on throughput. Furthermore, most
dling small short operations
of the I/O accesses are small. Because of this, TP applications are chiefly con 
(called transactions) that typi 
cerned with I/O rate, measured as the number of disk accesses per second, as
cally require both I/O and com 
opposed to data rate, measured as bytes of data per second. TP applications gen 
putation. Transaction
erally involve changes to a large database, with the system meeting some response
processing applications typi 
time requirements as well as gracefully handling certain types of failures. These
cally have both response time
requirements and a perfor  applications are extremely critical and cost-sensitive. For example, banks nor 
mance measurement based on mally use TP systems because they are concerned about a range of characteristics.
the throughput of transactions.
These include making sure transactions aren't lost, handling transactions quickly,
and minimizing the cost of processing each transaction. Although dependability
ItO rate Performance measure
of VOs per unit time, such as in the face of failure is an absolute requirement in such systems, both response
reads per second. time and throughput are critical to building cost-effective systems.
A number of transaction processing benchmarks have been developed. The
data rate Performance mea 
sure of bytes per unit time, such best-known set of benchmarks is a series developed by the Transaction Processing
as GB/second. Council (TPC).
TPC-C, initially created in 1992, simulates a complex query environment.
TPC-H models ad hoc decision support- the queries are unrelated and knowl 
edge of past queries cannot be used to optimize future queries; the result is that
query execution times can be very long. TPC-R simulates a business decision sup 
port system where users run a standard set of queries. In TPC-R, preknowledge of
the queries is taken for granted, and the DBMS can be optimized to run these que 
ries. TPC-W is a Web-based transaction benchmark that simulates the activities of
a business-oriented transactional Web server. It exercises the database system as
well as the underlying Web server software. The TPC benchmarks are described at
www.tpc.org.
All the TPC benchmarks measure performance in transactions per second. In
addition, they include a response time requirement, so that throughput perfor 
mance is measured only when the response time limit is met. To model real-world
systems, higher transaction rates are also associated with larger systems, both in
terms of users and the size of the database that the transactions are applied to.
Finally, the system cost for a benchmark system must also be included, allowing
accurate comparisons of cost-performance.
File System and Web I/O Benchmarks
File systems, which are stored on disks, have a different access pattern. For exa m 
ple, measurements of UNIX file systems in an engineering environment have
found that 80% of accesses are to files of less than 10 KB and that 90% of all file
accesses are to data with sequential addresses on the disk. Furthermore, 67% of
the accesses were reads, 27% were writes, and 6% were read-modify-write
accesses, which read data, modify it, and then rewrite the same location. Such