CH6 Glossary
action processing applications typically determined by the cause of the exception.
have both response time requirements and a verilog One of the two most common
performance measurement based on the hardware description languages.
throughput of transactions. very large scale integrated (VLSI)
transistor An on/off switch controlled by circuit A device containing hundreds of
an electric signaL thousands to millions of transistors.
translation-Iookaside buffer (TLB) A VHDL One of the two most common
cache that keeps track of recently used ad  hardware description languages.
dress mappings to avoid an access to the virtual address An address that corre 
page table. sponds to a location in virtual space and is
underflow (floating-point) A situation in translated by address mapping to a physical
which a negative exponent becomes too address when memory is accessed.
large to fit in the exponent field. virtual machine A virtual computer that
units in the last place (ulp) The number of appears to have nondelayed branches and
bits in error in theleast significant bits ofthe loads and a richer instruction set than the
significand between the actual number and actual hardware.
the number that can be prepresented. virtual memory A technique that uses
unmapped A portion of the address space main memory as a "cache" for secondary
that cannot have page faults. storage.
unresolved refereO(;e A reference that re  virtually addressed cache A cache that is
quires more information from an outside accessed with a virtual address rather than a
source in order to be complete. physical address.
untaken branch One that falls through to volatile memory Storage, such as DRAM,
the successive instruction. A taken branch is that only retains data only ifit is receiving
one that causes transfer to the branch target. power.
user CPU time The CPU time spent in a wafer A slice from a silicon ingot no more
program itself. than 0.1 inch thick, used to create chips.
vacuum tube An electronic component, weighted arithmetic mean An average of
predecessor of the transistor, that consists the execution time of a workload with
ofa hollow glass tube about 5 to 10 cm long weighting factors designed to reflect the
from which as much air has been removed presence of the programs in a workload;
as possibleand which uses an electron beam computed as the sum of the products of
to transfer data. weighting factors and execution times.
valid bit A field in the tables of a memory wide area network A network extended
hierarchy that indicates that the associated over hundredsofkilometers which can span
block in the hierarchy contains valid data. a continent.
vector processor An architecture and com  wire In Verilog, specifies a combinational
piler model that was popularized by super  signaL
computers in which high-level operations word The natural unit of access in a com 
work on linear arrays of numbers. puter, usually a group of 32 bits; corre 
vectored interrupt An interrupt for which sponds to the size of a register in the MIPS
the address to which control istransferred is architecture.