7.4 Virtual Memory 527
the memory hierarchy: the TLB, the page table, and the cache. The following
example illustrates these interactions in more detail..
Overall Operation of a Memory Hierarchy
In a memory hierarchy like that of Figure 7.24 that includes a TLB and a EXAMPLE
cache organized as shown, a memory reference can encounter three different
types of misses: a TLB miss, a page fault, and a cache miss. Consider all the
combinations of these three events with one or more occurring (seven possi 
bilities). For each possibility, state whether this event can actually occur and
under what circumstances.
Figure 7.26 shows the possible circumstances and whether they can arise in ANSWER
practice or not.
Elaboration: Figure 7.26 assumes that all memory addresses are translated to
physical addresses before the cache is accessed. In this organization, the cache is
physically indexed and physically tagged (both the cache index and tag are physical,
rather than virtual, addresses). In such a system, the amount of time to access mem 
ory, assuming a cache hit, must accommodate both a TLB access and a cache access;
of course, these accesses can be pipelined.
Alternatively, the processor can index the cache with an address that is completely
or partially virtual. This is called a virtually addressed cache, and it uses tags that are virtually addressed cache A
virtual addresses; hence, such a cache is virtually indexed and virtually tagged. In such cache that is accessed with a vir 
tual address rather than a physi 
caches, the address translation hardware (TLB) is unused during the normal cache
cal address.
access, since the cache is accessed with a virtual address that has not been trans 
lated to a physical address. This takes the TLB out of the critical path, reducing cache
11111.
Possible? If so, under what circumstance?
hit hit miss Possible, although the page table is never really checked if TLB hits.
miss hit hit TLB misses, but entry found in page table; after retry, data is found in cache.
miss hit miss TLB misses, but entry found in page table; after retry, data misses in cache.
miss miss miss TLB misses and is followed by a page fault; after retry, data must miss in cache.
hit miss miss Impossible: cannot have a translation in TLB if page is not present in memory.
hit miss hit Impossible: cannot have a translation in TLB if page is not present in memory.
miss miss hit Impossible: data cannot be allowed in cache if the page is not in memory.
FIGURE 7.26 The possible combinations of events In the TLB, virtual memory system,
and cache. Three ofthese combinations are impossible, and one is possible (TLB hit, virtual memory hit,
cache miss) but never detected.