G-.
Glossary
lookup tables (lUIs) In a field program  message passing Communicating between
mable device, the name given to the cells be  multiple processors by explicitly sending
cause they consist ofa small amount oflogic and receiving information.
and RAM. metastability A situation that occurs ifa
loop unrolling A technique to get more signalissampled when it is not stable for the
performance from loops that access arrays, required set-up and hold times, possibly
in which multiple copies of the loop body causing the sampled value to fall in the inde 
are made and instructions from different it  terminate region bet"veen a high and low
erations are scheduled together. value.
machine language Binary representation microarchitecture The organization ofthe
used for communication within a computer processor, including the major functional
system. units, their interconnection, and control.
macro A pattern-matching and replace  microcode The set of microinstructions
ment facility that provides a simple mecha  that control a processor.
nism to name a frequently used sequence of microinstruction A representation of
instructions. control using low-level instructions, each
magnetic disk (also called hard disk) A of which asserts a set of control signals
form of nonvolatile secondary memory that are active on a given clock cycle as
composed of rotating platters coated with a well as specifies what microinstruction to
magnetic recording material. execute next.
megabyte Traditionally 1,048,576 (220) micro-operations The RISC-like instruc 
bytes, although some communications and tions directly executed by the hardware in
secondary storage systems have redefined it recent Pentium implementations.
6
to mean 1,000,000 (10 ) bytes. microprogram A symbolic representation
memory The storage area in which pro  ofcontrol in the form of instructions, called
grams are kept when they are running and microinstructions, that are executed on a
that contains the data needed by the run  simple micromachine.
IlIng programs. microprogrammed control A method of
memory hierarchy A structure that uses specifying control that uses microcode rath 
multiple levels of memories; as the dis  er than a finite state representation.
tance from the CPU increases, the size of million instructions per second (MI PS) A
the memories and the access time both measurement of program execution speed
IIlcrease. based on the number of millions of instruc 
memory-mapped I/O An I/O scheme in tions. MIPS is computed as the instruction
which portions of address space are as  count divided by the product of the execu 
6
signed to I/O devices and reads and writes tion time and 10 .
to those addresses are interpreted as com  minterms Also called product terms.A set
mands to the I/O device. oflogic inputs joined by conjunction (AND
MESI cache coherency protocol A operations); the product terms form the
write-invalidate protocol whose name is first logic stage of the programmable logic
an acronym for the four states of the pro  array (PLA).
tocol: Modified, Exclusive, Shared, mirroring Writing the identical data to
Invalid. multiple disks to increase data availability.