48 Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
Introduction
To command a computer's hardware, you must speak its language. The words of a
computer's language are called instructions, and its vocabulary is called an
instruction set The vocabu  instruction set. In this chapter, you will see the instruction set of a real computer,
lary ofcommands understood both in the form written by humans and in the form read by the computer. We
by a given architecnlre.
introduce instructions in a top-down fashion. Starting from a notation that looks
like a restricted programming language, we refine it step-by-step until you see the
real language of a real computer. Chapter 3 continues our downward descent,
unveiling the representation of integer and floating-point numbers and the hard 
ware that operates on them.
You might think that the languages of computers would be as diverse as those
of humans, but in reality computer languages are quite similar, more like regional
dialects than like independent languages. Hence, once you learn one, it is easy to
pick up others. This similarity occurs because all computers are constructed from
hardware technologies based on similar underlying principles and because there
are a few basic operations that all computers must provide. Moreover, computer
designers have a common goal: to find a language that makes it easy to build the
hardware and the compiler while maximizing performance and minimizing cost.
This goal is time-honored; the following quote was written before you could buy a
computer, and it is as true today as it was in 1947:
It is easy to see by formal-logical methods that there exist certain {instrllction
sets} that are in abstract adequate to control and calise the execution ofany se 
quence ofoperations. ... The really decisive considerations from the present
point ofview, in selecting an {instrllction set}, are more ofa practical
nattlre: simplicity ofthe equipment demanded by the {instruction set}, and the
clarity ofits application to the actually important problems together with the
speed ofits handling ofthose problems.
Burks, Goldstine, and yon Neumann, 1947
The "simplicity of the equipment" is as valuable a consideration for com put 
ers of the 2oo0s as it was for those of the 1950s. The goal of this chapter is to
teach an instruction set that follows this advice, showing both how it is repre 
sented in hardware and the relationship between high-level programming lan 
guages and this more primitive one. Our examples are in the C programming
language; Section 2. 14 shows how these would change for an object-oriented
language like Java.