4 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
Computers have led to third revolution for civilization, with the information
:I
revolution taking its place alongside the agricultural and the industrial revolu 
tions. The resulting multiplication of humankind's intellectual strength and reach
naturally has affected our everyday lives profoundly and also changed the ways in
which the search for new knowledge is carried out. There is now a new vein of sci 
entific investigation, with computational scientists joining theoretical and experi 
mental scientists in the exploration of new frontiers in astronomy, biology,
chemistry, physics, ...
The computer revolution continues. Each time the cost of computing improves
by another factor of 10, the opportunities for computers multiply. Applications
that were economically infeasible suddenly become practical. In the recent past,
the following applications were "computer science fiction."
• Automatic teller machines: A computer placed in the wall of banks to dis 
tribute and collect cash would have been a ridiculous concept in the 1950s,
when the cheapest computer cost at least $500,000 and was the size of a car.
• Computers in automobiles: Until microprocessors improved dramatically in
price and performance in the early 1980s, computer control of cars was ludi 
crous. Today, computers reduce pollution and improve fuel efficiency via
engine controls and increase safety through the prevention of dangerous
skids and through the inflation of air bags to protect occupants in a crash.
• Laptop computers: \-VllO would have dreamed that advances in computer
systems would lead to laptop computers, allowing students to bring com  
puters to coffeehouses and on airplanes?
• Human genome project: The cost of computer equipment to map and ana 
lyze human DNA sequences is hundreds of millions of dollars. It's unlikely
that anyone would have considered this project had the computer costs been
10 to 100 times higher, as they would have been 10 to 20 years ago.
• World Wide Web: Not in existence at the time of the first edition of this
book, the World Wide Web has transformed our society. Among its uses are
distributing news, sending flowers, buying from online catalogues, taking
electronic tours to help pick vacation spots, finding others who share your
esoteric interests, and even more mundane topics like finding the lecture
notes of the authors of your textbooks.
Clearly, advances in this technology now affect almost every aspect of our society.
Hardware advances have allowed programmers to create wonderfully useful soft 
ware, and explain why computers are omnipresent. Tomorrow's science fiction
computer applications are the cashless society, automated intelligent highways,
and genuinely ubiquitous computing: no one carries computers because they are
available everywhere.