3.
Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
on each wafer, creating the transistors, conductors, and insulators discussed ear 
lier. Today's integrated circuits contain only one layer of transistors but may have
from two to eight levels of metal conductor, separated by layers of insulators.
A single microscopic flaw in the wafer itself or in one of the dozens of pattern 
defect A microscopic flaw in a ing steps can result in that area of the wafer failing. These defects, as they are
wafer or in patterning steps that
called, make it virnlally impossible to mallufacnlre a perfect wafer. To cope with
can result in the failure ofthe
imperfection, several strategies have been used, but the simplest is to place many
die containing that defect.
independent components on a single wafer. The patterned wafer is then chopped
up, or diced, into these components, called dies and more informally known as
die The individual rectangular
sections that are cut from a chips. Figure 1.1 5 is a photograph of a wafer containing Pentium 4 microproces 
wafer, more informally known
sors before they have been diced; earlier, Figure 1.9 on page 21 showed all indi 
as chips.
vidual die of the Pentium 4 and its major components.
Dicing enables you to discard only those dies that were unlucky enough to con 
yield The percentage of good tain the flaws, rather than the whole wafer. This concept is quantified by the yield
dies from the total number of of a process, which is defined as the percentage of good dies from the total number
dies on the wafer.
of dies on the wafer.
The cost of all integrated circuit rises quickly as the die size increases, due both
to the lower yield and the smaller number of large dies that fit on a wafer. To
reduce the cost, a large die is often "shrunk" by using the next generation process,
which incorporates smaller sizes for both transistors and wires. This improves the
yield and the die count per wafer. (An " Integrated Circuit Cost section on the
CD probes these issues further.)
Once you've found good dies, they are connected to the input/output pins of
a package, using a process called bonding. These packaged parts are tested a fin al
time, since mistakes can occur in packaging, and then they are shipped to cus 
tomers.
Another increasingly important design constraint is power. Power is a chal 
lenge for two reasons. First, power must be brought in alld distributed around the
chip; modern microprocessors use hundreds of pins just for power and ground!
Similarly, multiple levels of interconnect are used solely for power and ground dis 
tribution to portions of the chip. Second, power is dissipated as heat and must be
removed. An Intel Pentium 4 at 3.06 GHz burns 82 watts, which must be removed
2
from a chip whose surface area is just over I cm 1 Figure 1.1 6 shows a 3.06 GHz
Pentium 4 mounted on top of its heat sink, which in turn sits right next to the fan
in the box shown in Figure 1.8 (on page 19)!
What determines the power consumed by all integrated circuit? Ignoring tech 
nology and circuit specifics, the power is proportional to the product of the num 
ber of transistors switched times the frequency they are switched. Thus, in general,
higher clock rates or higher transistor counts lead to higller power. For example,
the Intel Itanium 2 has four times the transistors of the Intel Pentium 4; althougll
its clock rate is only one-half that of the Pentium 4, the Itanium burns 130 watts