3.5 Division 183
Divide et impera.
Latin for "Divide and mle,"
Division
ancient political maxim cited
by Machiavelli, 1532
The reciprocal operation of multiply is divide, an operation that is even less fre 
quent and even more quirky. It even offers the opportunity to perform a mathe 
matically invalid operation: dividing by O.
Let's start with an example of long division using decimal numbers to recall the
names of the operands and the grammar school division algorithm. For reasons
similar to those in the previous section, we limit the decimal digits to just 0 or 1.
The example is dividing 1,00 1,0 I0ten by looOten:
100 Iten Quotient
Divisor 1000 110010 IO Dividend
ten ten
- 1000
10
101
1010
- 1000
IO Remainder
ten
The two operands (dividend and divisor) and the result (quotient) of divide dividend Anumber being
divided.
are accompanied by a second result called the remainder. Here is another way to
express the relationship between the components:
divisor A number that the
dividend is divided by.
+
Dividend = Quotient X Divisor Remainder
quotient The primary result of
where the remainder is smaller than the divisor. Infrequently, programs use the a division; a number that when
divide instruction just to get the remainder, ignoring the quotient. multiplied by the divisor and
added to the remainder pro 
The basic grammar school division algorithm tries to see how big a number
duces the dividend.
can be subtracted, creating a digit of the quotient on each attempt. Our carefully
selected decimal example uses only the numbers 0 and I, so it's easy to figure out remainder The secondary
how many times the divisor goes into the portion of the dividend: it's either 0 result ofa division; a number
that when added to the product
times or I time. Binary numbers contain only 0 or I, so binary division is
ofthe quotient and the divisor
restricted to these two choices, thereby simplifying binary division.
produces the dividend.
Let's assume that both the dividend and divisor are positive and hence the quo 
tient and the remainder are nonnegative. The division operands and both results
are 32-bit values, and we will ignore the sign for now.