7.1 Introduction 469
you brought out the book on ea rly English computers to find out about
EDSAC, you also noticed that there was another book shelved next to it
about early mechanical computers, so you also brought back that book too
and, later on, found something useful in that book. Books on the same topic
are shelved together in the library to increase spatial locality. We'll see how
spatial locality is used in memory hierarchies a little later in this chapter.
Just as accesses to books on the desk naturally exhibit locality, locality in pro 
grams arises from simple and natural program structures. For example, most pro 
grams contain loops, so instructions and data are likely to be accessed repeatedly,
showing high amounts of temporal locality. Since instructions are normally
accessed sequentially, programs show high spatial locality. Accesses to data also
exhibit a natural spatial locality. For example, accesses to elements of an array or a
record will naturally have high degrees of spatial locality.
We take advantage of the principle of locality by implementing the memory of
a computer as a memory hierarchy. A memory hierarchy consists of multiple lev  memory hierarchy A struc 
els of memory with different speeds and sizes. The faster memories are more ture that uses multiple levels of
memories; as the distance from
expensive per bit than the slower memories and thus smaller.
the CPU increases, the size of
Today, there are three primary technologies used in building memory hierar 
the memories and the access
chies. Main memory is implemented from DRAM (dynamic random access
time both increase.
memory), while levels closer to the processor (caches) use SRAM (static random
access memory). DRAM is less costly per bit than SRAM, although it is substan 
tially slower. The price difference arises because DRAM uses significantly less
area per bit of memory, and DRAMs thus have larger capacity for the same
amount of silicon; the speed difference arises from several factors described in
Section B.8 of Appendix B. The third technology, used to implement the largest
and slowest level in the hierarchy, is magnetic disk. The access time and price
per bit vary widely among these technologies, as the table below shows, using
typical values for 2004:
Memory technology typical access time $ per GB In 2004
SRAM 0.5--5 ns $4000-.$10,000
DRAM 50-70 ns $100-$200
Magnetic disk 5,OOO,CX>O-20,()(X),OOO ns $0.5Q-.$2
Because of these differences in cost and access time, it is advantageous to build
memory as a hierarchy of levels. Figure 7.1shows the faster memory is close to the
processor and the slower, less expensive memory is below it. The goal is to present
the user with as much memory as is available in the cheapest technology, while
providing access at the speed offered by the fastest memory.