268 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
million instructions per sec  One alternative to time as the metric is MIPS (million instructions per second).
ond (MIPS) Ameasurement of For a given program , MIPS is simply
program execution speed based
Instruction count
on the number ofmillions of
MIPS =
6
instructions. MIPSis computed Execution time X 10
as the instruction count divided
This MIPS measurement is also called native MIPS to distinguish it from some
by the product ofthe execution
II
alternative definitions of MI PS that we discuss in in Section 4.8 on the CD.
time and 1(1'.
Since MIPS is an instruction execution rate, MIPS specifies performance
inversely to execution time; faster computers have a higher MIPS rating. The good
news about MIPS is that it is easy to understand, and faster computers mean big 
ger MIPS, which matches innlition.
There are three problems with using MIPS as a measure for comparing com 
puters. First, MIPS specifies the instruction execution rate but does not take into
account the capabilities of the instructions. We cannot compare computers with
different instruction sets using MIPS, since the instruction counts will certainly
differ. In our earlier example examining the SPEC CFP2000 performance, using
MIPS to compare the performance of the Pentium III and Pentium 4 would yield
misleading results. Second, MIPS varies between programs on the same com 
puter; thus a computer cannot have a single MIPS rating for all programs. Finally
and most importantly, MIPS can vary inversely with performance! There are
many examples of this anomalous behavior; one is given below.
MIPS as a Performance Measure
EXAMPLE Consider the computer with three instruction classes and CPI measurements
from the last example on page 252. Now suppose we measure the code for the
same program from two different compilers and obtain the following data:
Instruction counts (In billions)
for each Instruction class
Code from
Compiler 1 5 1 1
Compiler 2 10 1 1
Assume that the computer's clock rate is 4 GHz. \Vhich code sequence will
execute faster according to MIPS? According to execution time?