610 Chapter 8
performance, measured both in latency and in throughput. These goals lead to
widely varying schemes for interfacing I/O devices. In the low-end and midrange
systems, buffered DMA is likely to be the dominant transfer mechanism. In the
high-end systems, latency and bandwidth may both be important, and cost may
be secondary. Multiple paths to I/O devices with limited buffering often charac 
terize high-end I/O systems. Typically, being able to access the data on an I/O
device at any time (high availability) becomes more important as systems grow. As
a result, redundancy and error correction mechanisms become more and more
prevalent as we enlarge the system.
Storage and networking demands are growing at unprecedented rates, in part
because of increasing demands for all information to be at your fingertips. One
estimate is that the amount of information created in 2002 was 5 exabytes 
equivalent to 500,000 copies of the text in the U.S. Library of Congress-and that
the total amount of information in the world doubled in the last three years
(Lyman and Varian 2003J.
Future directions of I/O include expanding the reach of wired and wireless net 
works, with nearly every device potentially having an IP address, and the continu 
ing transformation from parallel buses to serial networks and switches. However,
consolidation in the disk industry may lead to a slowdown in improvement in disk
capacity to earlier rates, which have doubled every year between 2000 and 2004.
Understanding The performance of an I/O system, whether measured by bandwidth or latency,
depends on all the elements in the path between the device and memory, includ 
Program
ing the operating system that generates the I/O commands. The bandwidth of the
Performance
buses, the memory, and the device determine the maximum transfer rate from or
to the device. Similarly, the latency depends on the device latency, together with
any latency imposed by the memory system or buses. The effective bandwidth and
response latency also depend on other I/O requests that may cause contention for
some resource in the path. Finally, the operating system is a bottleneck. In some
cases, the OS takes a long time to deliver an I/O request from a user program to an
I/O device, leading to high latency. In other cases, the operating system effectively
limits the I/O bandwidth because of limitations in the number of concurrent I/O
operations it can support.
Keep in mind that while performance can help sell an I/O system, users over 
whelmingly demand dependability and capacity from their I/O systems.