518 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
Virtual page
number
Page table
Physical page or Physical memory
Valid disk address
/,
1 / /
1
1
1
~
0
1
1
0 ~
Disk storage
1
1
~
0
1
-,
[ I
I
FIGURE 7.22 The page table maps each page In virtual memory to either a page In
main memory or a page stored on disk, which Is the next level In the hierarchy. The vir 
tual page number is used to index the page table. If the valid bit is on, the page table supplies the physical
page number (i.e., the starting address of the page in memory) corresponding to the virtual page. If the
valid bit is off, the page currently resides only on disk, at a specified disk address. In many systems, the
table of physical page addresses and disk page addresses, while logically one table, is stored in two sepa 
rate data structures. Dual tables are justified in part because we must keep the disk addresses of all the
pages, even if they are currently in main memory. Remember that the pages in main memory and the
pages on disk are identical in size.
shows the organization when a single table holds either the physical page number
or the disk address.
The operating system also creates a data structure that tracks which processes
and which virtual addresses use each physical page. When a page fault occurs, if all
the pages in main memory are in use, the operating system must choose a page to
replace. Because we want to minimize the number of page faults, most operating
systems try to choose a page that they hypothesize will not be needed in the near
future. Using the past to predict the future, operating systems follow the least
recently used (LRU) replacement scheme, which we mentioned in Section 7.3.
The operating system searches for the least recently used page, making the
assumption that a page that has not been used in a long time is less likely to be
needed than a more recently accessed page. The replaced pages are written to swap
space on the disk. In case you are wondering, the operating system is just another