6.1 An Overview of Plpellnlng 379
Both add instructions have a haza rd because of their respective dependence
ANSWER
on the immediately preceding 1w instruction. Notice that bypassing elimi 
nates several other potential hazards including the dependence of the first
add on the first 1wand any haza rds for store instructions. Moving up the
third 1winstruction eliminates both hazards:
lw I tl , O(ltO)
lw ItZ , 4(lt1)
lw 1t4, 8(101)
add 1t3 , Itl , ltZ
sw 1t3 , lZ(ltO)
add 1t5 , Itl , lt4
sw 1t5 , 16(ltO)
On a pipelined processor with forwarding, the reordered sequence will
complete in two fewer cycles than the original version.
Forwarding yields another insight into the MIPS architecnlre, in addition to
the four mentioned on page 374-375. Each MIPS instruction writes at most one
result and does so near the end of the pipeline. Forwarding is harder if there are
multiple results to forward per instruction or they need to write a result early on
in instruction execution.
Elaboration: The name "forwarding" comes from the idea that the result is passed
forward from an earlier instruction to a later instruction. "Bypassing" comes from pass 
ing the result by the register file to the desired unit.
Control Hazards
The third type of haza rd is called a control hazard, arising from the need to make control hazard Also called
a decision based on the results of one instruction while others are executing. branch hazard. An occurrence
in which the proper instruction
Suppose our laundry crew was given the happy task of cleaning the uniforms of
cannot execute in the proper
a football team. Given how filthy the laundry is, we need to determine whether the
clock cycle because the instruc 
detergent and water temperature setting we select is strong enough to get the uni 
tion that was fetched is not the
forms clean but not so strong that the uniforms wear out sooner. In our laundry
one that is needed; that is, the
pipeline, we have to wa it until the second stage to examine the dry uniform to see
flow ofinstruction addresses is
if we need to change the washer setup or not. What to do? not what the pipeline expected.
Here is the first of two solutions to control hazards in the laundry room and its
computer equivalent.
Stall: Just operate sequentially until the first batch is dry and then repeat until
you have the right formula. This conservative option certainly works, but it is
slow.