264 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
design of processors for laptops. Battery capacity has improved only slightly over
time, with the major improvements coming from new m aterials. Hence, the abil 
ity of the processor to operate efficiently and conserve power is crucial. To save
power, techniques ranging from putting parts of the computer to sleep, to reduc 
ing clock rate and voltage, have all been used. In fact, power consumption is so
impo rtant that Intel has designed a line of processors, the Pentium M series, spe 
cifically fo r mobile, battery-powered applications.
As we discussed in Chapter 1, for CMOS technology, we can reduce power by
reducing frequency. Hence, recent processors intended fo r laptop use all have the
ability to adapt frequency to reduce power consumption, simultaneously, of
course, reducing perfo rmance. Thus, adequately evaluating the energy efficiency
of a processor requires examining its performance at maximum power, at an
intermediate level that conserves battery life, and at a level that maximizes battery
life. In the Intel Mobile Pentium and Pentium M lines, there are two available
clock rates: m aximum and a reduced clock rate. The best performance is obtained
by running at maximum speed, the best battery life by running always at the
reduced rate, and the intermediate, performance-power optimized level by
switching dynamically between these two clock rates.
Figure 4.8 shows the performance of three Intel Pentium processors designed
fo r use in mobile applications running SPEC CINT2000 and SPEC CFP2000 as
benchmarks. As we can see, the newest processor, the Pentium M, has the best
performance when run a full clock speed, as well as with the adaptive clock rate
mode. The Pentium M's 600 MHz clock makes it slower when run in minimum
power mode than the Pentium 4-M, but still faster than the older Pentium lIl -M
design.
For power-limited applications, the m ost important m etric is probably
energy efficiency, which is computed by taking perfo rmance and dividing by
average power consumption when running the benchmark. Figure 4.9 shows the
relative energy efficiency fo r these processors running the SPEC2000 bench 
marks.This data clearly shows the energy efficiency advantage of the newer Pen 
tium M design. In all three modes, it has a significant advantage in energy
efficiency over the mobile versions of the Pentium III and Pentium 4. Notice
that the Pentium 4-M has only a slight efficiency advantage over the Pentium
llI -M. This data clearly shows the adva ntage of a processor like the Pentium M,
which is designed for reduced power usage from the start, as opposed to a
design like the Pentium llI -M or Pentium 4-M, which are modified versions of
the standard processors. Of course, adequately measuring energy efficiency also
requires the use of additional benchmarks designed to reflect how users employ
battery-powered com puters. Both PC review magazines and Intel's technical
journal regularly undertake such studies.