242 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
ever, the 747 would clearly be the fastest, as the last column of the figure shows. Sim 
ilarly, we can define computer performance in several different ways.
If you were running a program on two different desktop computers, you'd say
that the faster one is the desktop computer that gets the job done first. If you were
running a data center that had several servers running jobs submitted by many
response time Also called users, you'd say that the faster computer was the one that completed the most jobs
execution time. The total time
during a day. As an individual computer user, you are interested in reducing
required for the computer to
response time-the time between the start and completion of a task-also referred
complete a task, including disk
to as execution time. Data center managers are often interested in increasing
accesses, memory accesses, I/O
throughput-the total amount of work done in a given time. Hence, in most cases,
activities, operating system
we will need different performance metrics as well as different sets of applications to
overhead, CPU execution time,
bendlmark desktop computers versus servers, and embedded computers require yet
and so all.
other metrics and applications. We will see examples of this in section 4.4 when we
look at different SPEC benchmarks: one meant to measure CPU performance
(SPEC CPU) and one meant to measure Web server performance (SPECweb99).
Throughput and Response Time
EXAMPLE Do the following changes to a computer system increase throughput, decrease re 
sponse time, or both?
1. Replacing the processor in a computer with a faster version
2. Adding additional processors to a system that uses multiple processors
for separate tasks-for example, searching the World Wide Web.
ANSWER Decreasing response time almost always improves throughput. Hence, in case
1, both response time and throughput are improved. In case 2, no one task
gets work done faster, so only throughput increases. If, however, the demand
for processing in the second case was almost as large as the throughput, the
system might fo rce requests to queue up. In this case, increasing the through  
put could also improve response time, since it would reduce the waiting time
in the queue. Thus, in many real computer systems, changing either execu 
tion time or throughput often affects the other.
In discussing the performance of computers, we will be primarily concerned
with response time for the first few chapters. (In Chapter 8, on input/output sys 
tems, we will discuss throughput-related measures.) To maximize performance,
we want to minimize response time or execution time for some task. Thus we can
relate performance and execution time for a computer X: