5.5 A Multleyele Implementation 331
•
Loads: 5
•
Stores: 4
•
ALU instructions: 4
•
Branches: 3
•
Jumps: 3
The CPI is given by the following:
L
Instruction count,. x CPI;
CPU clock cycles ,
CPI =
Instruction count Instruction count
lnstruction count;
I
.,---,---,--.,------' x CPI;
Instruction count
The ratio
Instruction count;
Instruction count
is simply the instruction frequency for the instruction class i. We can there 
fore substitute to obtain
CPI = 0.25x5+0.lOx 4 +0.52x 4 +0. ll x3+0.02x3 = 4.1 2
This CPI is better than the worst-case CPI of 5.0 when all the instructions
take the same number of clock cycles. Of course, overheads in both designs
may reduce or increase this difference. The muiticycle design is probably also
more cost-effective, since it uses fewer separate components in the datapath.
finite state machine Asequen 
tia1logic function consistingofa
The first method we use to specify the muiticycle control is a finite state set ofinputs and outputs, a next 
state fi.mction that maps the cur 
machine. A finite state machine consists of a set of states and directions on how to
rent state and the inputs to a new
change states. The directions are defined by a next-state function, which maps the
state, and an output function
current state and the inputs to a new state. \-Vhen we use a finite state machine for
that maps the current state and
control, each state also specifies a set of outputs that are asserted when the
possibly the inputs to a set of
machine is in that state. The implementation of a finite state machine usually
asserted outputs.
assumes that all outputs that are not explicitly asserted are deasserted. Similarly,
next-state function A combi 
the correct operation of the datapath depends on the fa ct that a signal that is not
national fi.mction that, given the
explicitly asserted is deasserted, rather than acting as a don't care. For example,
inputs and the current state,
the RegWrite signal should be asserted only when a register file entry is to be writ 
determines the next state ofa
ten; when it is not explicitly asserted, it must be deasserted. finite state machine.