G-2 Glossary
asserted signal A signal that is (logically) bit error rate The fraction in bits of a
true, or 1. message or collection of messages that is
asynchronous bus A bus that uses a hand  incorrect.
shaking protocol for coordinating usage block The minimum unit of information
rather than a clock; can accommodate a that can be either present or not present in
wide variety of devices of differing speeds. the two-level hierarchy.
atomic swap operation An operation in blocking assignment In Verilog, an assign 
which the processor can both read a loca  ment that completes before the execution of
tion and write it in the same bus operation, the neA1: statement.
preventing any other processor or I/O branch delay slot The slot directly after a
device from reading or writing memory un  delayed branch instruction, which in the
til it completes. MIPSarchitecture is filled by an instruction
backpatching A method for translating that does not affect the branch.
from assembly language to machine in  branch not taken A branch where the
structions in which the assembler builds a branch condition is false and the program
(possiblyincomplete) binaryrepresentation counter (PC) becomes the address of the in 
of every instruction in one pass over a pro  struction that sequentially follows the
gram and then returns to fill in previously branch.
undefined labels. branch prediction A method of resolvinga
backplane bus A bus that is designed to al  branch hazard that assumes a given out 
low processors, memory, and I/O devices to come for the branch and proceeds from that
coexist on a single bus. assumption rather than waiting to ascertain
barrier synchronization A synchroniza  the actual outcome.
tion scheme in which processors wait at the branch prediction buffer Also called
barrier and do not proceed until every pro  branch history table. A small memory that
cessor has reached it. is indexed by the lower portion of the ad 
basic block A sequence of instructions dress of the branch instruction and that
without branches (except possibly at the contains one or more bits indicating wheth 
end) and without branch targets or er the branch was recently taken or not.
branch labels (except possibly at the branch taken A branch where the branch
beginning). condition is satisfied and the program
behavioral specification Describes how a counter (PC)becomes thebranch target.A11
digital system operates functionally. unconditional branches are taken branches.
biased notation A notation that represents branch target address The address speci 
the most negative value byOO ooolWOand fied in a branch, which becomes the new
the most positive value by II Illwo, with program counter (PC) if the branch is tak 
o
typically having the value 10 OOt....u' en. ln the MIPSarchitecture the branch tar 
thereby biasing the number such that the get is given by the sum of the offset field of
number plus the bias has a nonnegative the instruction and the address of the in 
representation. struction following the branch.
binary digit Also called a bit. One of the branch target buffer A structure that cach 
two numbers in base 2 (0 or I) that are the es the destination PC or destination instruc 
components of information. tion for a branch. It is usually organized as a