4.2 CPU Performance and Its Factors 253
So code sequence 2 is faster, even though it acn,ally executes one extra
instruction. Since code sequence 2 takes fewer overall clock cycles but has
more instructions, it must have a lower CPI. The CPl values can be computed
by
CPU clock cycles
CPI =
Instruction count
CPU clock cycles,
10
CPI , - 2
Instruction count, 5
CPU clock cycles
9
CPI = 2 - 1.5
2
Instruction count 6
2
The above example shows the danger of using only one factor (instruction
count) to assess performance. When comparing two computers, you must look at
all three components, which combine to form execution time. If some of the fac 
tors are identical, like the clock rate in the above example, performance can be
determined by comparing all the nonidentical factors. Since CPI varies by
instruction mix, both instruction count and CPI must be compared, even if clock instruction mix A measure of
rates are identical. Several of the exercises ask you to evaluate a series of computer the dynamic frequency of
instructions across one or many
and compiler enhancements that affect clock rate, CPI, and instruction count. In
programs.
the next section, we'll examine a common performance measurement that does
not incorporate all the terms and can thus be misleading.
Two of the major fa ctors that affect CPI are the performance of the pipeline,
whicll is the tecllllique used by all modern processors to execute instructions, and
the performance of the memory system. In Chapter 6, we will see how pipeline per 
formance adds to the CPI through stalls, and in Chapter 7 we will see how the per 
formance of the caclles can increase the CPI due to stalls in the memory system.
A given application written in lava runs IS seconds on a desktop processor. A new Check
lava compiler is released that requires only 0.6 as many instructions as the old Yourself
compiler. Unfortunately it increases the CPI by 1.1. How fast can we expect the
application to run using this new compiler?
,.
15xO.6 '" 8.2sec
I.I
b. 15xO.6 xl.l ",9.9sec
15x l.l
'" 27.5sec
0.6