608 Chapter 8
of tapes. As disks are closed systems, disk heads need only read the platters
enclosed with them, and this advantage explains why disks are improving much
more rapidly.
Today, some orga nizations have dropped tapes altogether, using networks and
remote disks to replicate the data geographically. The sites are picked so that disas 
ters would not take out both sites, enabling instantaneous recovery time. (Long
recovery time is another serious drawback to the serial nature of magnetic tapes.)
Such a solution depends on advances in disk capacity and network bandwidth to
make economic sense, but these two are getting much greater investment and
hence have better recent records of accomplishment than tape.
Fallacy: A 100 ME/sec blls can transfer 100 MB ofdata in 1 second.
First, you generally cannot use 100% of any computer resource. For a bus, you
would be fortunate to get 70% to 80% of the peak bandwidth. Time to send the
address, time to acknowledge the signals, and stalls while waiting to use a busy bus
are among the reasons you cannot use 100% of a bus.
Second, the definition of a megabyte of storage and a megabyte per second of
bandwidth do not agree. As we discussed on page 597, I/O bandwidth measures
6
are usually quoted in base 10 (Le., 1 MB/sec = 10 bytes/sec), while 1 MB of data
20
is typically a base 2 measure (Le., 1 MB = 2 bytes). How significant is this dis 
tinction? If we could use 100% of the bus for data transfer, the time to transfer 100
MB of data on a lOO-MB/sec bus is actually
"
JOQ X 2 = ~ = 1.048576'" 1.05 second
6
100 X 10 1,000,000
A similar but larger error is introduced when we treat a gigabyte of data trans 
9 30
ferred or stored as equivalent, meaning 10 versus 2 bytes.
Pitfall: Trying to provide featllres only within the network versus end to end.
The concern is providing at a lower level features that can only be accomplished at
the highest level, thus only partially satisfying the communication demand.
Saltzer, Reed, and Clark [1984) give the end-to-end argument as
The function in question can completely and correctly be specified only with the
knowledge and help ofthe application standing at the endpoints ofthe commu 
nication system. Therefore, providing that questionedfunction as a featllre of
the communication system itselfis not possible.
Their example of the pitfall was a network at MIT that used several gateways, each
of which added a checksum from one gateway to the next. The programmers of
the application assumed the checksum guaranteed accuracy, incorrectly believing
that the message was protected while stored in the memory of each gateway. One
gateway developed a transient failure that swapped one pair of bytes per million