2.
Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
motherboard A plastic board shows the contents of the desktop computer in Figure 1.6. This motherboard is
containing packages of shown vertically on the left with the power supply. Three disk drives-a DVD
integrated circuits or chips,
drive, Zip drive, and hard drive-appear on the right.
including processor, cache,
The small rectangles on the motherboard contain the devices that drive our
va
memory, and connectors for
advancing technology, integrated circuits or chips. The board is composed of
devices such as networks and
three pieces: the piece connecting to the I/O devices mentioned earlier, the mem  
disks.
ory, and the processor. The I/O devices are connected via the two large boards
integrated circuit Also called
attached perpendicularly to the motherboard toward the middle on the right 
chip. A device combining doz 
hand side.
ens to millions oftransistors.
The memory is where the programs are kept when they are running; it also
memory The storage area in
contains the data needed by the running programs. In Figure 1.8, memory is
which programs are kept when
found on the two small boards that are attached perpendicularly toward the mid 
they are running and that con 
dle of the motherboard. Each small memory board contains eight integrated cir 
tains the data needed by the
cuits.
rUfimng programs.
The processor is the active pa rt of the boa rd, following the instructions of a pro 
gram to the letter. It adds numbers, tests numbers, signals I/O devices to activate,
and so on. The processor is the large square below the mem ory boards in the
central processor unit (CPU)
lower-right corner of Figure 1.8. Occasionally, people call the processor the CPU,
Also called processor. The active
for the more bureaucratic-sounding central processor unit.
part ofthe computer, which
contains the datapath and Descending even lower into the hardware, Figure 1.9 reveals details of the pro 
COI1 
trol and which adds numbers, cessor in Figure 1.8. The processor comprises two main components: datapath
tests numbers, signals I/O and control, the respective brawn and brain of the processor. The datapath per 
devices to activate, and so on.
forms the arithmetic operations, and control tells the datapath, memory, and I/O
devices what to do according to the wishes of the instructions of the program.
datapath The component of
the processor that performs Chapter 5 explains the datapath and control for a straightforward implementa 
arithmetic operations. tion, and Chapter 6 describes the changes needed for a higher-performance
design.
control The component ofthe
Descending into the depths of any component of the hardware reveals insights
processor that commands the
datapath, memory, and I/O into the machine. The memory in Figure 1.10 is built from DRAM chips. DRAM
devices according to the instruc 
stands for dynamic random access memory. Several DRAMs are used together to
tions ofthe program.
contain the instructions and data of a program. In contrast to sequential access
dynamic random access memories such as magnetic tapes, the RAM portion of the term DRAM means
memory (DRAM) Memory that memory accesses take the same amount of time no matter what portion of
built as an integrated circuit, it
the memory is read. Inside the processor is another type of memory-cache
provides random access to any
memory. Cache memory consists of a small, fa st memory that acts as a buffer for
location.
the DRAM memory. (The nontechnical definition of cache is a safe place for hid 
cache memory A small, fast ing things.) Cache is built using a different memory technology, static random
memory that acts as a buffer for
access memory (SRAM). SRAM is fa ster but less dense, and hence more expen 
a slower, larger memory.
sive, than DRAM.