7.2 The Basics of Caches 487
Instruction miss rate Data miss rate Effective combined miss rate
0.496 11.496 3.2%
FtGURE 7.10 Approximate Instruction and data miss rates for the Intrlnslty FastMATH
processor for SPEC2000 benchmarks. The combined miss rate is the effective miss rate seen for the
combination of the 16 KB instruction cache and 16 KB data cache. It is obtained by weighting the instruc 
tion and data individual miss rates by the frequency of instruction and data references.
\-¥hat cache miss rates are attained with a cache strucnlre like that used by the
lntrinsity FastMATH? Figure 7.10 shows the miss rates for the instruction and
data caches for the SPEC2000 integer benchmarks. The combined miss rate is the
effective miss rate per reference for each program after accounting for the differ 
ing frequency of instruction and data accesses.
Although miss rate is an important characteristic of cache designs, the ultimate
measure will be the effect of the memory system on program execution time; we'll
see how miss rate and execution time are related shortly.
Elaboration: A combined cache with a total size equal to the sum of the two split split cache A scheme in which
caches will usually have a better hit rate. This higher rate occurs because the combined a level ofthe memory hierarchy
cache does not rigidly divide the number of entries that may be used by instructions is composed oftwo independent
caches that operate in parallel
from those that may be used by data. Nonetheless, many processors use a split
with each other with one
instruction and data cache to increase cache bandwidth.
handling instructions and one
Here are miss rates for caches the size of those found in the Intrinsity FastMATH
handling data.
processor, and for a combined cache whose size is equal to the total of the two caches:
• Total cache size: 32 KB
• Split cache effective miss rate: 3.24%
• Combined cache miss rate: 3.18%
The miss rate of the split cache is only slightly worse.
The advantage of doubling the cache bandwidth, by supporting both an instruction
and data access simultaneously, easily overcomes the disadvantage of a slightly
increased miss rate. This observation is another reminder that we cannot use miss rate
as the sole measure of cache performance, as Section 7.3 shows.
Designing the Memory System to Support Caches
Cache misses are satisfied from main memory, which is constructed from
DRAMs. In Section 7.1, we saw that DRAMs are designed with the primary
emphasis on density rather than access time. Although it is difficult to reduce the
latency to fetch the first word from memory, we can reduce the miss penalty if we
increase the bandwidth from the memory to the cache. This reduction allows