338 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Combinational
control logic Datapath control outputs
Outputs
Inputs
,
,
A
Next state
State register
Inputs from instruction
register opcode field 1
FIGURE 5.37 Finite state machine controllers are typically Implemented using a block of
combinational logic: and a register to hold the current state. The outputs of the combinational
logic are the next-state nwnber and the control signals to be asserted for the current state. The inputs to the
oombinMionailogic are the current state and any inputs used to determine the next stale. In this case,the inputs
are the instruction register opcooe bits. Notice that in the finite state machine used in this chapter, the outputs
depend only on the current state, not on the inputs. The 8.1boration above explains this in more detail.
instructions are one universal example. There are many examples the IA-32
III
architecture that require the use of multicycle control.
Elaboration: The style of finite state machine in Figure 5.37 is called a Moore
machine, after Edward Moore. Its identifying characteristic is that the output depends
only on the current state. For a Moore machine, the box labeled combinational control
logic can be split into two pieces. One piece has the control output and only the state
input, while the other has only the next-state output.
An alternative style of machine is a Mealy machine, named after George Mealy. The
Mealy machine allows both the input and the current state to be used to determine the
output. Moore machines have potential implementation advantages in speed and size
of the control unit. The speed advantages arise because the control outputs, which are
needed early in the clock cycle, do not depend on the inputs, but only on the current
III
state. In Appendix C, when the implementation of this finite state machine is taken
down to logic gates, the size advantage can be clearly seen.The potential disadvantage
of a Moore machine is that it may require additional states. For example, in situations