1.3 Under the Covers 27
combined with the increases in capacity have made network technology central to
the information revolution of the last 25 years.
Recently, another innovation in networking is reshaping the way computers
communicate. Wireless technology has become widely deployed, and most lap 
tops now incorporate this technology. The ability to make a radio in the same low 
cost semiconductor technology (CMOS) used for memory and microprocessors
enabled a significant improvement in price, leading to an explosion in deploy 
ment. Currently available wireless technologies, called by the IEEE standard name
802.11, allow for transmission rates from I to less than 100 million bits per sec 
ond. Wireless technology is quite a bit different from wire-based networks, since
all users in an immediate area share the airwaves.
1. Semiconductor DRAM and disk storage differ significantly. Describe the Check
fundamental difference for each of the following: volatility, access time, and Yourself
cost.
Technologies for Building Processors and Memories
Processors and memory have improved at an incredible rate because computer
designers have long embraced the latest in electronic technology to try to win the
race to design a better computer. Figure 1.1 2 shows the technologies that have
been used over time, with an estimate of the relative performance per unit cost for
each technology. This section explores the technology that has fueled the com 
puter industry since 1975 and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future.
Since this technology shapes what computers will be able to do and how quickly
they will evolve, we believe all computer professionals should be familiar with the
basics of integrated circuits.
A transistor is simply an on/off switch controlled by electricity. The integrated transistor An on/offswitch
circuit (Ie) combined dozens to hundreds of transistors into a single chip. To controlled by an electric signal.
describe the tremendous increase in the number of transistors from hundreds to
Technology used In computers Relative performance/ unit cost
1951 Vacuum tube 1 vacuum tu be An electronic
1965 Transistor 35 component, predecessor ofthe
transistor, that consists ofa hol 
1975 Integrated circuit 900
low glass ntbe about 5 to 10 em
1995 Very large scale integrated circuit 2,400,000
long from which as much air has
2005 Ultra large scale integrated circuit 6,200,000,000
been removed as possible and
FIGURE 1.12 Relative performance per unit cost of technologies used In computers which uses an electron beam to
over time. Source: Computer Museum, Boston, with 2005 extrapolated by the authors. transfer data.