260 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
Integer benchmarks FP benchmarks
Description
gzip Compression wupwise Quantum chromodynamics
'p' FPGA cin:uit placementand routing swim Shallow water model
goo The Gnu C compiler Multigrid solver in 3.Q potential field
mol Combinatorial optimization applu Parabolic/ elliptic partial differential equation
crafty Chess program mesa Three-dimensional graphics library
parser Word processing program galgel Computational fluid dynamics
Computer visualization ,rt Image re<:ognition using neural networks
pertbmk pert application equake Seismic wave propagation simulation
g,p
Group theory, interpreter facerec Image re<:ognition of faces
vortex Obje<:t~riented database ammp Computational chemistry
bzip2 Compression lucas Primality testing
twolf Place and rote simulator fma3d Crash simulation using finite-element method
sixtrack HiglHmergy nuclear physics accelerator design
apsi Meteorology: pollutant distribution
FIGURE 4.5 The SPEC CPU2000 benchmarks. The 12 integer benchntarks in the left half of the
table are written in C and C++, while the floating-point benchmarks in the right half are written in Fortran
(77 or 90) and C. For more information on SPEC and on the SPEC benchmarks, see www.spec.org. The
SPEC CPU benchmarks use wall dock tinte as the metric, but because there is little 110, they measure CPU
performance.
For a given instruction set architecture, lIlcreases CPU performance can
III
come from three sources:
1. Increases in clock rate
2. Improvements in processor orga nization that lower the CPI
3. Compiler enhancements that lower the instruction count or generate
instructions with a lower average CPI (e.g., by using simpler instructions)
To illustrate such performance improvements, Figure 4.6 shows the SPEC
CINT2000 and CFP2000 measurements for a series of Intel Pentium III and Pen 
tium 4 processors measured using the Dell Precision desktop computers. Since
SPEC requires that the benchmarks be run on real hardware and the memory sys 
tem has a significant effect on performance, other systems with these processors
may produce different performance levels. In addition to the clock rate differ 
ences, the Pentium III and Pentium 4 use different pipeline structures, which we
describe in more detail in Chapter 6.
There are several important observations from these two performance graphs.
First, observe that the performance of each of these processors scales almost lin 
early with clock rate increases. Often this is not the case, since losses in the mem-