7.1 Introduction 471
Processor
~
Data are translerred
FtGURE 7.2 Every pair of levels In the memory hierarchy can be thought of as having an
upper and lower level. Within each level, the unit ofinformation that is present or not is called a block.
Usually we transfer an emire block when we copy something between levels.
mance of the memory hierarchy. The miss rate (I - hit rate) is the fraction of miss rate The fraction of
memory accesses not found in the upper level. memory accesses not found in a
level of the memory hierarchy.
Since performance is the major reason for having a memory hierarchy, the time
to service hits and misses is important. Hit time is the time to access the upper
level of the memory hierarchy, which includes the time needed to determine hit time The time required to
whether the access is a hit or a miss (that is, the time needed to look through the access a level of the memory
hierarchy, including the time
books on the desk). The miss penalty is the time to replace a block in the upper
needed to determine whether
level with the corresponding block from the lower level, plus the time to deliver
the access is a hit or a miss.
this block to the processor (or, the time to get another book from the shelves and
place it on the desk). Because the upper level is smaller and built using faster
miss penalty The time
memory pa rts, the hit time will be much smaller than the time to access the next
required to fetch a block into a
level in the hierarchy, which is the major component of the miss penalty. (The
level of the memory hierarchy
time to examine the books on the desk is much smaller than the time to get up from the lower level, including
and get a new book from the shelves.) the time to access the block,
As we will see in this chapter, the concepts used to build memory systems transmit it from one level to the
other, and insert it in the level
affect many other aspects of a computer, including how the operating system
that experienced the miss.
manages memory and 110, how compilers generate code, and even how appli 
cations use the computer. Of course, because all programs spend much of
their time accessing memory, the memory system is necessa rily a major factor
in determining performance. The reliance on memory hierarchies to achieve
performance has meant that programmers, who used to be able to think of
memory as a flat, random access storage device, now need to understand