566 Chapter 8
Introduction
Although users can get frustrated if their computer hangs and must be rebooted,
they become apoplectic if their storage system crashes and they lose information.
Thus, the bar for dependability is much higher for storage than for computation.
Networks also plan for failures in communication, including several mechanisms
to detect and recover from such failures. Hence, I/O systems generally place much
greater emphasis on dependability and cost, while processors and memory focus
on performance and cost.
I/O systems must also plan for expandability and for diversity of devices, which
is not a concern for processors. Expandability is related to storage capacity, which
is another design parameter for I/O systems; systems may need a lower bound of
storage capacity to fulfill their role.
Although performance plays a smaller role for I/O, it is more complex. For
example, with some devices we may care primarily about access latency, while
with others throughput is crucial. Furthermore, performance depends on many
aspects of the system: the device characteristics, the connection between the
device and the rest of the system, the memory hierarchy, and the operating sys 
tem. Figure 8.1 shows the structure of a simple system with its I/O. All of the com 
ponents, from the individual I/O devices to the processor to the system software,
will affect the dependability, expandability, and performance of tasks that include
110.
I/O devices are incredibly diverse. Three characteristics are useful in organizing
this wide variety:
• Behavior: Input (read once), output (write only, cannot be read), or storage
(can be reread and usually rewritten).
• Partner: Either a human or a machine is at the other end of the I/O device,
either feeding data on input or reading data on output.
• Data rate: The peak rate at which data can be transferred between the I/O
device and the main memory or processor. It is useful to know what maxi 
mum demand the device may generate.
For exa mple, a keyboard is an inpl/tdevice used by a hI/mall with a peak data rate
of about 10 bytes per second. Figure 8.2 shows some of the I/O devices connected
to computers.
In Chapter 1, we briefly discussed four important and characteristic I/O
devices: mice, graphics displays, disks, and networks. In this chapter we go into
much more depth on disk storage and networks.