CH2 Glossary
terms ofthe product terms. Hence, PLAs im  receive m essage routine A routine used
plement logic functionsas a sum ofproducts. by a processor in machines with private
programmable logic device (PLO) An in  memories to accept a message from anoth 
tegrated circuit containing combinational er processor.
logic whose function is configured by the recursive procedures Procedures that call
end user. themselves either directly or indirectly
programmable ROM (PROM) A form of through a chain of calls.
read-only memory that can beprogrammed redundant arrays of inexpensive disks
when a designer knows its contents. (RAID) An organization of disks that uses
propagation time The time required for an an array of small and inexpensive disks so as
input to a flip-flop to propagate to the out  to increase both perfonnance and reliability.
puts of the flip-flop. reference bit Also called use bit. A field
protected A Java keyword that restricts in  that is set whenever a page is accessed and
vocation of a method to other methods in that is used to implement LRU or other re 
that package. placement schemes.
protection A set of mechanisms for ensur  reg In Verilog, a register.
ing that multiple processes sharing the pro  register file A state element that consists ofa
cessor, memory, or I/O devices cannot set ofregisters that can be read and written by
interfere, intentionally or unintentionally, supplying a register number to be accessed.
with one another by reading or writing each register renaming The renaming of regis 
other's data. These mechanisms also isolate ters, by the compiler or hardware, to re 
the operating system from a user process. move antidependences.
protection group The group of data disks register-use convention Also called proce 
or blocks that share a common check disk dure call convention. A software protocol
or block. goveming the use of registers by procedures.
pseudoinstruction Acommonvariation of relocation information The segment of a
assembly language instmctions often treat  UNIX object file that identifies instmc 
ed as if it were an instmction in its own tions and data words that depend on abso 
right. lute addresses.
publk A Java keyword that allows a meth  remainder The secondary result of a divi 
od to be invoked by any other method. sion; a number that when added to the
quotient The primary result ofa division; a product ofthe quotient and the divisor pro 
number that when multiplied by the divisor duces the dividend.
and added to the remainder produces the reorder buffer Thebuffer that holdsresults
dividend. in a dynamically scheduled processor until
read-only memory (ROM) A memory it is safe to store the results to memory or a
whose contents are designated at creation register.
time, after which the contents can only be reservation station A buffer within a func 
read. ROM is used as stmctured logic to im  tional unit that holds the operands and the
plement a set oflogic functions by using the operation.
terms in the logic functions as address in  response time Also called execution time.
puts and the outputs as bits in each word of The total time required for the computer to
the memory. complete a task, including disk accesses,