326 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Operation: Send the PC to the memory as the address, perform:l read, and write
the instruction into the Instruction register (IR), where it will be stored. Also,
increment the PC by 4. We use the symbol "<=" from Verilog; it indicates that all
right-hand sides are evaluated and then all assignments are made, which is effec 
tively how the hardware executes during the clock cycle.
To implement this step, we will need to assert the control signals MemRead and
IRWrite, and set lorD to 0 to select the PC as the source of the address. We also
increment the PC by 4, which requires setting the ALUSrcA signal to 0 (sending the
PC to the ALU), the ALUSrcB signal to 01 (sending 4 to the ALU), and ALUOp to 00
(to make the ALU add). Finally, we will also want to store the incremented instruc 
tion address back into the PC, which requires setting PC source to ()() and setting
PCWrite. The increment of the PC and the instruction memory access can occur in
parallel. The new value of the PC is not visible until the next clock cycle. (The incre 
mented PC will also be stored into ALUOut, but this action is benign.)
2. Instruction decode and register fetch step
In the previous step and in this one, we do not yet know what the instruction is, so
we can perform only actions that are either applicable to all instructions (such as
fetching the instruction in step 1) or are not harmful, in case the instruction isn't
what we think it might be. Thus, in this step we can read the two registers indi 
cated by the rs and rt instruction fields, since it isn't harmful to read them even if
it isn't necessary. The values read from the register file may be needed in later
stages, so we read them from the register file and store the values into the tempo 
rary registers A and B.
We will also compute the branch target address with the ALU, which also is not
harmful because we can ignore the value if the instruction out not to be a
nlfllS
branch. The potential branch target is saved in ALUOut.
Perfo rming these "optimistic" actions early has the benefit of decreasing the
number of clock cycles needed to execute an instruction. We can do these optimis 
tic actions early because of the regularity of the instruction formats. For
instance, if the instruction has two register inputs, they are always in the rs and rt
fields, and if the instruction is a branch, the offset is always the low-order 16 bits:
A Reg[IR[ZS , ZlJJ ,
<~
B Reg[IR[ZO , 16JJ ,
<~
<= «
ALUOut PC + (s ign -ext end (IR[15 - 0]) 2) ;
Operation: Access the register file to read registers rs and rt and store the results
into the registers A and B. Since A and B are overwritten on every cycle, the regis 
ter file can be read on every cycle with the values stored into A and B. This step
also computes the branch target address and stores the address in ALUOut, where