320 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Replacing the three ALUs of the single-cycle datapath by a single ALU means that
the single ALU must accommodate all the inputs that used to go to the three differ 
ent ALUs. Handling the additional inputs requires two changes to the datapath:
I. An additional multiplexor is added for the first ALU input. The multiplexor
chooses between the A register and the Pc.
2. The multiplexor on the second ALU input is changed from a two-way to a
four-way multiplexor. The two additional inputs to the multiplexor are the
constant 4 (used to increment the PC) and the sign-extended and shifted
offset field (used in the branch address computation).
Figure 5.26 shows the details of the datapath with these additional multiplex 
ors. By introducing a few registers and multiplexors, we are able to reduce the
number of memory units from two to one and eliminate two adders. Since regis 
ters and multiplexors are fairly small compared to a memory unit or ALU, this
could yield a substantial reduction in the hardware cost.
'0
PC L.. 'IJ'
Instruction Read
M
," Address [25-21] register 1 _ M ~
Read
A L- ~r-
"- Instruction data 1 f--
Read
Memory - 1 Zero
[20-16]
register 2
0
MemData "-' ) ALU ALU
Instruction Registers ALUOut
M
[15-0] Instruction ," Write R d - ,r;::---... resuR
. te ea ~ Mt-- V
Write (15-11) regis r data 2 B
data Instruction 1 - 4-0
register ..r Write "
r- 0 2 ,
d.~
M
Instruction , 3
"
[15-0]
1 \
1
I
Memory 16 32
Sign Shift
c..
data
extend left 2
register
\
FIGURE 5.26 Multleycle data path for MIPS handles the basic Instructions. Although thIS d.1lapath supports normal incrementing ofthe
PC, a few more connections and a multiplexor will be needed for branches and jwnps; we will add these shortly. The additions versllS the single-clock
d.1lapath include several registers (IR, MDR, A, B,ALUOut), a multiplexor for the memory address, a multiplexor for the top AW input, and expanding
the multiplexor on the bottomALU input into a four-way selector. These small additions allow to remove tm> adders and a memory unit.
lIS