244 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
In the above example, we could also say that computer B is 1.5 times slower
thall computer A, since
Performance
A
1.5
Performance
B
means that
Performance
A
= Performance
B
1.5
For simplicity, we will normally use the terminology faster than when we try to
compare computers quantitatively. Because performance and execution time are
reciprocals, increasing performance requires decreasing execution time. To avoid
the potential confusion between the terms increasing and decreasing, we usually
say "improve performance" or "improve execution time" when we mean "increase
performance" and "decrease execution time."
Elaboration: Performance in embedded systems is often characterized by real-time
constraints: that is, certain application-specific events must occur within a limited
amount of time. There are two common types of real-time constraints: hard real time
and soft real time. Hard real time defines a fixed bound on the time to respond to or
process some event. For example, the embedded processor that controls an antilock
brake system must respond within a hard limit from the time it receives a signal that
the wheels are locked. In soft real-time systems, an average response or a response
within a limited time to a large fraction of the events suffices. For example, handling
video frames in a DVD playback system would be an example of a soft real-time con 
straint. since dropping a frame is permissible, if it happens very rarely. In embedded
real-time applications, once the response-time performance constraint is met, design 
ers often optimize throughput or try to reduce cost.
Measuring Performance
Time is the measure of computer performance: the computer that performs the
same amount of work in the least time is the fastest. Program execlltion time is
measured in seconds per program. But time can be defined in different ways,
depending on what we count. The most straightforward definition of time is
called wall-clock time, response time, or elapsed time. These terms mean the total
time to complete a task, including disk accesses, memory accesses, input/output
0 /0 ) activities, operating system overhead-everything.
Computers are often shared, however, and a processor may work on several
programs simultaneously. In such cases, the system may try to optimize through 
CPU execution time Also
put rather than attempt to minimize the elapsed time for one program. Hence, we
called CPU time. The actual
often want to distinguish between the elapsed time and the time that the proces 
time the CPU spends comput 
sor is working on our behalf. CPU execution time or simply CPU time, which
ing for a specific task.