1.1 Introduction 9
We are honored to have the opportunity to explain what's inside this rev 
olutionary machine, unraveling the software below your program and the hard 
ware under the covers of your computer. By the time you complete this book, we
believe you will be able to answer the following questions:
• How are programs written in a high-level language, such as C or Java, trans 
lated into the langll3ge of the hardwa re, and how does the hardwa re execute
the resulting program? Comprehending these concepts forms the basis of
understanding the aspects of both the hardware and software that affect pro 
gram performance.
• What is the interface between the software and the hardware, and how does
softwa re instruct the hardware to perform needed functions? These con 
cepts are vital to understanding how to write many kinds of software.
• What determines the performance of a program, and how ca n a program 
mer improve the performance? As we will see, this depends on the original
program, the software translation of that program into the computer's lan 
gll3ge, and the effectiveness of the hardware in executing the program.
• What techniques can be used by hardware designers to improve perfor 
mance? This book will introduce the basic concepts of modern computer
design. The interested reader will find much more material on this topic in
our advanced book, A Computer Architecture: A Qllantitlltive Approach.
Without understanding the answers to these questions, improving the perfor 
mance of your program on a modern computer, or evaluating what features might
make one computer better than another for a particular application, will be a
complex process of trial and error, rather than a scientific procedure driven by
insight and analysis.
This first chapter lays the foundation for the rest of the book. It introduces the
basic ideas and definitions, places the major components of software and hard 
ware in perspective, and introduces integrated circuits, the technology that fuels
the computer revolution. In this chapter, and later ones, you will likely see a lot of
new words, or words that you may have heard, but are not sure what they mean.
Don't panic! Yes, there is a lot of special terminology used in describing modern
computers, but the terminology acnlally helps since it enables us to describe pre  acronym A word constructed
by taking the initial letters of
cisely a function or capability. In addition, computer designers (including your
string of words. For example:
authors) love using acronyms, which are easy to understand once you know what
RAM is an acronym for Ran 
the letters stand for! To help you remember and locate terms, we have included a
dom Access Memory, and CPU
highlighted definition of every term, the first time it appears in the text. After a
is an acronym for Central Pro 
short time of working with the terminology, you will be fluent, and your friends
cessing Unit.