7.5 A Common Framework for Memory Hierarchies 543
BIG
While caches, TLBs, and virtual memory may initially look very different,
The
they rely on the same two principles of locality and can be understood by
Picture
looking at how they deal with four questions:
Question 1: Where can a block be placed?
Answer: One place (direct mapped), a few places (set associative),
or any place (fully associative).
Question 2: How is a block found?
Answer: There are four methods: indexing (as in a direct-mapped
cache), limited search (as in a set-associative cache), full
search (as in a fully associative cache), and a separate
lookup table (as in a page table).
Question 3: What block is replaced on a miss?
Answer: Typically, either the least recently used or a random block.
Question 4: How are writes handled?
three Cs model Acache model
Answer: Each level in the hierarchy can use either write-through
in which all cache misses are
or write-back.
classified into one of three cate 
gories:compulsory misses,
capacity misses, and conflict
misses.
The Three Cs: An Intuitive Model for Understanding the
Behavior of Memory Hierarchies
compulsory miss Also called
cold start miss. Acache miss
In this section, we look at a model that provides insight into the sources of misses
caused by the first access to a
in a memory hierarchy and how the misses will be affected by changes in the hier 
block that has never been in the
archy. We will explain the ideas in terms of caches, although the ideas ca rryover
cache.
directly to any other level in the hierarchy. In this model, all misses are classified
into one of three categories (the three Cs): capacity miss Acache miss
that occursbecause the cache,
• Compulsory misses: These are cache misses caused by the first access to a
even with full associativity, can 
block that has never been in the cache. These are also called cold-start misses. not contain all the block needed
to satisfy the request.
• Capacity misses: These are cache misses caused when the cache cannot con 
tain all the blocks needed during execution of a program. Capacity misses
conflict miss Also called colli 
occur when blocks are replaced and then later retrieved. sion miss. Acache miss that
occurs in a set-associative or
• Conmct misses: These are cache misses that occur in set-associative or
direct-mapped cache when mul·
direct-mapped caches when multiple blocks compete for the sa me set. Con 
tiple blocks compete for the
fl ict misses are those misses in a direct-m apped o r set-associative cache that same set and that are eliminated
are eliminated in a fully associative cache of the same size. These cache in a fully associative cache of the
same size.
misses are also called collision misses.