7.3 Measuring and Improving Cache Performance 509
Elaboration: Multilevel caches create several complications. First, there are now
several different types of misses and corresponding miss rates. In the example on
page 499, we saw the primary cache miss rate and the global miss rate- the fraction global m iss rate The fraction
of references that missed in all cache levels. There is also a miss rate for the second  ofreferences that miss in all lev 
ary cache, which is the ratio of all misses in the secondary cache divided by the num  e1s ofa multilevel cache.
ber of accesses. This miss rate is called the local miss rate of the secondary cache.
Because the primary cache filters accesses, especially those with good spatial and local m iss rate The fraction of
temporal locality, the local miss rate of the secondary cache is much higher than the references to one level ofa cache
that miss; used in multilevel
global miss rate. For the example on page 499, we can compute the local miss rate of
hierarchies.
the secondary cache as: 0.5%/2% = 25%! Luckily, the global miss rate dictates how
often we must access the main memory.
Additional complications arise because the caches may have different block sizes to
match the larger or smaller total size. Likewise, the associativity of the cache may
change. On-chip caches are often built with associativity of four or higher, while off-chip
caches rarely have associativity of greater than two. On chip Ll caches tend to have
lower associativity than one chip L2 caches since fast hit time is more important for Ll
caches. These changes in block size and associativity introduce complications in the
modeling of the caches, which typically mean that all levels need to be simulated
together to understand the behavior.
Elaboration: With out-of-order processors, performance is more complex, since they
execute instructions during the miss penalty. Instead of instruction miss rate and data
miss rates, we use misses per instruction, and this formula:
Memory stall cycles _
Misse.s X (Total miss latency - Overlapped miss latency)
Instruction Instruction
There is no general way to calculate overlapped miss latency, so evaluations of
memory hierarchies for out-of-order processors inevitably require simulation of the pro 
cessor and memory hierarchy. Only by seeing the execution of the processor during
each miss can we see if the processor stalls waiting for data or simply finds other work
to do. A guideline is that the processor often hides the miss penalty for an Ll cache
miss that hits in the L2 cache, but it rarely hides a miss to the L2 cache.
Elaboration: The performance challenge for algorithms is that the memory hierarchy
varies bet.....een different implementations of the same architecture in cache size, asso 
ciativity, block size, and number of caches. To copy with such variability, some recent
numerical libraries parameterize their algorithms and then search the parameter space
at runtime to find the best combination for a particular computer.