3.6 Floating Point 189
Summary
The common hardware support for multiply and divide allows MIPS to provide a
single pair of 32-bit registers that are used both for multiply and divide. Figure 3. 14
summarizes the additions to the MIPS architecture for the last two sections.
MIPS divide instructions ignore overflow, so software must determine if the quo  Hardware
tient is too large. In addition to overflow, division can also result in an improper
Software
o.
calculation: division by Some computers distinguish these two anomalous
Interface
events. MIPS software must check the divisor to discover division by 0 as well as
overflow.
Elaboration: An even faster algorithm does not immediately add the divisor back if
the remainder is negative. It simply adds the dividend to the shifted remainder in the
following step since (r + d) x 2 - d = r x 2 + d x 2 - d = r x 2 + d. This nonrestoring divi 
sion algorithm, which takes 1 clock per step, is explored further in Exercise 3.29; the
algorithm here is called restoring division.
Speed gets you nowhere if
you're headed the wrong
Roating Point
way.
American proverb
Going beyond signed and unsigned integers, programming languages support
numbers with fractions, which are called reals in mathematics. Here are some
examples of reaIs:
3.141 59265...It'n (rr)
2.7 1828...ten (e)
9
O.OOOOOOOO lten o r 1.0 X 10- (seconds in a nanosecond)
ten
9
3, I55,760,OOOten or 3.1 5576 X 10 (seconds in a typical century)
ten
Notice that in the last case, the number didn't represent a small fraction, but it
scientific notation Anotation
was bigger than we could represent with a 32-bit signed integer. The alternative that renders numberswith a sin·
gle digit to the left ofthe deci 
notation fo r the last two numbers is called scientific notation, which has a single
mal point.
digit to the left of the decimal point. A number in scientific notation that has no
leading Os is called a normalized number, which is the usual way to write it. For normalized Anumber in
9
example, 1.0ten X 10- is in normalized scientific notation, but O.lten X 10--8 and floating-point notation that has
1O.0 X 10-10 are not. no leading Os.
ten