Glossary G-7
global pointer The register that is reserved ItO instructions A dedicated instruction
to point to static data. that is used to give a command to an 110 de 
guard The first oftwo eA1:ra bits kept on the vice and that specifies both the device num 
right during intermediate calculations of ber and the command word (or thelocation
floating-point numbers; used to improve of the command word in memory).
rounding accuracy. ItO rate Performance measure ofllOs per
handler Name of a software routine in  unit time, such as reads per second.
voked to "handle" an exception or interrupt. ItO requests Reads or writes to 110 devices.
handshakingprotocol A series ofsteps used implementation Hardware that obeys the
to coordinate asynchronous bus transfers in architecture abstraction.
which the sender and receiver proceed to the imprecise interrupt Also called imprecise
neA1: step only when both parties agree that exception. Interrupts or exceptions in pipe 
the current step has been completed. lined computers that arenot associated with
hardware description language A pro  the exact instruction that was the cause of
gramming language for describing hardware the interrupt or exception.
used for generating simulations ofa hard  in-order commit A commit in which the
ware design and also as input to synthesis results of pipelined execution are written to
tools that can generate actual hardware. the programmer-visible state in the same
hardwaresynthesistools Computer-aided order that instructions are fetched.
design software that can generate a gate-lev  input device A mechanism through which
el design based on behavioral descriptions the computer isfed information,such as the
of a digital system. keyboard or mouse.
hardwired control An implementation of instruction format A form of representa 
finite state machine control typically using tion of an instruction composed of fields of
programmable logic arrays (PLAs) or col  binary numbers.
lections of PLAs and random logic. instruction group In IA-64, a sequence of
hexadecimal Numbers in base 16. consecutive instructions with no register
high-level programming language A por  data dependences among them.
table language such as C, Fortran, or Java instruction latency The inherent execu 
composed of words and algebraic notation tion time for an instruction.
that can be translated by a compiler into as  instruction mix A measure ofthe dynamic
sembly language. frequency of instructions across one or
hit rate The fraction of memory accesses many programs.
found in a cache. instruction set architecture Also called ar 
hit time The time required to access a level chitecture. An abstract interface between
of the memory hierarchy, including the the hardware and the lowest level software
time needed to determine whether the ac  of a machine that encompasses all the infor 
cess is a hit or a miss. mation necessary to write a machine
hold time The minimum time during language program that will run correctly,
which the input must be valid after the clock including instructions, registers, memory
edge. access, 110, and so on.
hot swapping Replacing a hardware com  instruction set The vocabulary of com 
ponent while the system is running. mands understood by a given architecture.