470 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
Current
Speed CPU Size Cost (Sibil) Technology
Fastest Smallest Highest SRAM
DRAM
Slowest Biggest Lowest Magnetic Disk
FIGURE 7.1 The basic structure of a memory hierarchy. By implementing the memory system
as a hierarchy, the user has the iUusion of a memory that is as large as the largest level of the hierarchy, but
can be accessed as jf it were aU buill from the fastest memory.
The memory system is organized as a hierarchy: a level closer to the processor
is generally a subset of any level further away, and all the data is stored at the low 
est level. By analogy, the books on your desk form a subset of the library you are
working in, which is in turn a subset of all the libraries on campus. Furthermore,
as we move away from the processor, the levels take progressively longer to access,
just as we might encounter in a hierarchy of campus libraries.
A memory hierarchy can consist of multiple levels, but data is copied between
only two adjacent levels at a time, so we can focus our attention on just two levels.
The upper level- the one closer to the processor-is smaller and faster (since it
uses more expensive technology) than the lower level. Figure 7.2 shows that the
minimum unit of information that can be either present or not present in the
blo(;k The minimum unit of two-level hierarchy is called a block or a line; in our library analogy, a block of
information that can be either information is one book.
present or not present in the
If the data requested by the processor appea rs in some block in the upper level,
t\Vo-level hierarchy.
this is called a hit (analogous to your finding the information in one of the books
on your desk). If the data is not found in the upper level, the request is called a
miss. The lower level in the hierarchy is then accessed to retrieve the block con 
hit rate The fraction ofmem  taining the requested data. (Continuing our analogy, you go from your desk to the
ory accesses found in a cache. shelves to find the desired book.) The hit rate, or hit ratio, is the fraction of mem 
ory accesses found in the upper level; it is often used as a measure of the perfor-