284 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Introduction
In Chapter 4, we saw that the performance of:1 machine was determined by three
key factors: instruction count, clock cycle time, and clock cycles per instruction
(CPl). The compiler and the instruction set architecture, which we examined in
Chapters 2 and 3, determine the instruction count required for a given program.
However, both the clock cycle time and the number of clock cycles per instruction
are determined by the implementation of the processor. In this chapter, we con 
struct the datapath and control unit for two different implementations of the
MIPS instruction set.
This chapter contains an explanation of the principles and techniques used in
implementing a processor, starting with a highly abstract and simplified overview
in this section, followed by sections that build up a datapath and construct a sim 
ple version of a processor sufficient to implement instructions sets like MIPS, and
finally, developing the concepts necessary to implement more complex instruc 
tions sets, like the IA-32.
For the reader interested in understanding the high-level interpretation of
instructions and its impact on program performance, this initial section provides
enough background to understand these concepts as well as the basic concepts of
pipelining, which are expla ined in Section 6.1 of the next chapter.
For those readers desiring an understanding of how hardware implements
instructions, Sections 5.3 and 5.4 are all the additional material that is needed.
Furthermore, these two sections are sufficient to understand all the material in
Chapter 6 on pipelining. Only those readers with an interest in hardware design
should go further.
The remaining sections of this chapter cover how modern hardwa re-includ 
ing more complex processors such as the Intel Pentium series-is usually imple 
mented. The basic principles of finite state control are explained, and different
methods of implementation, including microprogramming, are examined. For
the reader interested in understanding the processor and its performance in more
depth, Sections 5.4 and 5.5 will be useful. For readers with an interest in modern
hardware design, • Section 5.7 covers microprogramming, a technique used to
implement more complex control such as that present in IA-32 processors, and
.. Section 5.8 describes how hardwa re design languages and CAD tools are used
to implement hardware.