Glossary G-15
supercomputer A class of computers with system performance evaluation coopera 
the highest performance and cost; they are tive (SPEC) benchmark A set of standard
configured as servers and typically cost mil  CPU-intensive, integer and floating point
lions of dollars. benchmarks based on real programs.
superscalar An advanced pipelining tech  systems software Soft""are that provides
nique that enables the processor to execute services that are commonly useful, includ 
more than one instruction per clock cycle. ing operating systems, compilers, and as 
swap space The space on the disk reserved semblers.
for the full virtual memoryspace ofa process. tag A field in a table used for a memory hi 
switched network A network of dedicated erarchy that contains the address informa 
point-to-point links that are connected to tion required to identify whether the
each other with a switch. associated block in the hierarchy corre 
symbol table A table that matches names sponds to a requested word.
oflabels to the addresses of the memory temporal locality The principle stating
words that instructions occupy. that ifa data location is referenced then it
symmetric multiprocessor (SMP) or will tend to be referenced again soon.
uniform memory access (UMA) A multi  terabyte Originally 1,099,511 ,627,776 (240)
processor in which accesses to main memo  bytes, although some communications and
ry take the same amount of time no matter secondarystorage systems have redefined it to
12
which processor requests the access and no mean 1,000,000,000,000 (10 ) bytes.
matter which word is asked. text segment The segm ent of a UNIX ob 
synchronization The process of coordi  ject file that contains the machine language
nating the behavior of two or more process  code for routines in the source file.
es, which may be running on different three Cs model A cache model in which all
processors. cache misses are classified into one of three
synchronizer failure A situation in which a categories: compulsory misses, capacity
flip-flop enters a metastable state and where misses, and conflict misses.
some logic blocks reading the output of the tournament branch predictor A branch pre 
flip-flop see a 0 while others see a 1. dictor with multiple predictions for each
synchronous bus A bus that includes a clock branch and aselection mechanism thatchooses
in the control lines and a fixed protocol for which predictor to enable for a given branch
communicating that is relative to the clock. trace cadle An instruction cache that
synchronous system A memory system holds a sequence ofinstructions with a given
that employs clocks and where data signals starting address; in recent Pentium imple 
are read only when the clock indicates that mentations the trace cache holds microoper 
the signal values are stable. ations rather than lA-32 instructions.
system call A special instruction that trans  track One of thousands of concentric cir 
fers control from user mode to a dedicated cles that makes up the surface of a magnetic
location in supervisor code space, invoking disk.
the exception mechanism in the process. transaction processing A type of applica 
system CPU time The CPU time spent in tion that involves handling small short op 
the operating system performing tasks on erations (called transactions) that typically
behalfof the program. require both I/O and computation. Trans-