18 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
Through the Looking Glass
Through compl/ter displays
1have landed an airplane on
The most fascinating I/O device is probably the graphics display. Based on televi 
the deck ofa moving carrier,
sion technology, a cathode ray tube (CRT) display scans an image one line at a
observed a fluclear particle
time, 30 to 75 times per second. At this refresh rate, people don't notice a flicker on
hit a potential well, j10wn in
the screen.
a rocket at nearly the speed
The image is composed of a matrix of picture elements, or pixels, which can be
oflight and watched a com 
represented as a matrix of bits, called a bit map. Depending on the size of the
puter reveal its innermost
screen and the resolution, the display m atrix ranges in size from 512 X 340 to
workings.
1920 X 1280 pixels in 2003. The simplest display has I bit per pixel, allowing it to
Ivan Sutherland, the "father"
be black or white. For displays that support 256 different shades of black and
of computer graphics, quoted
white, sometimes called gray-scale displays, 8 bits per pixel are required. A color
in "Computer Software for
display might use 8 bits for each of the three colo rs (red, blue, and green), for
Graphics:' Scientific American,
24 bits per pixel, permitting millions of different colors to be displayed.
1984
All laptop and handheld computers, calculators, cellular phones, and many
desktop com puters use flat-panel or liquid crystal displays (LCDs) instead of
CRTs to get a thin, low-power display. The main difference is that the LCD pixel is
cathode ray tube (CRT)
display A display, such as a not the source of light; instead it controls the transmission of light. A typical LCD
television set, that displays an
includes rod-shaped molecules in a liquid that fo rm a twisting helix that bends
image using an electron beam
light entering the display, from either a light source behind the display o r less
scanned across a screen.
often from reflected light. The rods straighten out when a current is applied and
pixel The smallest individual no longer bend the light; since the liquid crystal m aterial is between two screens
picnlrc element. Screen are polarized at 90 degrees, the light cannot pass through unless it is bent. Today,
composed ofhundreds ofthou 
most LCD displays use an active matrix that has a tiny transistor switch at each
sands to millions ofpixels, orga 
pixel to precisely control current and make sharper images. As in a CRT, a red 
nized in a matrix.
green-blue mask associated with each pixel determines the intensity of the three
flat panel display, liquid uys  colo r components in the final image; in a color active matrix LCD, there are three
tal display A display technol 
transistor switches at each pixel.
ogy using a thin layer ofliquid
No matter what the display, the computer hardware support for graphics con 
polymers that can be used to
sists mainly of a raster refresh buffer, or frame buffer, to store the bit map. The
transmit or block light accord 
image to be represented on-screen is sto red in the frame buffer, and the bit pattern
ingto whether a charge is
applied. per pixel is read out to the graphics display at the refresh rate. Figure 1.7 shows a
frame buffer with 4 bits per pixel.
active matrix display Aliquid
The goal of the bit map is to faithfully represent what is on the screen. The
crystal display using a transistor
challenges in graphics systems arise because the human eye is very good at
to control the transmission of
light at each individual pixel. detecting even subtle changes on the screen. For example, when the screen is being
updated, the eye can detect the inconsistency between the portion of the screen
that has changed and that which hasn't.
Opening the Box
If we open the box containing the computer, we see a fascinating board of thin
green plastic, covered with dozens of small gray or black rectangles. Figure 1.8