26 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
the power of computing by including communication. Networks have become so
popular that they are the backbone of current computer systems; a new machine
without an optional network interface would be ridiculed. Networked computers
have several major adva ntages:
• Comm unication: Information is exchanged between computers at high
speeds.
• Resource sharing: Rather than each machine having its own I/O devices,
devices can be shared by computers on the network.
• Non/ocal access: By connecting computers over long distances, users need
not be near the computer they are using.
Networks vary in length and performance, with the cost of communication
increasing according to both the speed of communication and the distance that
information travels. Perhaps the most popular type of network is the Ethernet. Its
length is limited to about a kilometer, and the most popular version in 2004 takes
about a tenth of a second to send 1 million bytes of data. Its length and speed
make Ethernet useful to connect computers on the same floor of a building;
lo(;al area network (LAN) A hence, it is an example of what is generically called a local area network. Local
network designed to carry data
area networks are interconnected with switches that can also provide routing ser 
within a geographically confined
vices and security. Wide area networks cross continents and are the backbone of
area, typically within a single
the Internet, which supports the World Wide Web. They are typically based on
building.
optical fibers and are leased from telecommunication companies.
wide area network A network
Networks have changed the face of computing in the last 25 years both by
extended over hundreds ofkilo 
becoming much more ubiquitous and by dramatic increases in perfo rmance. In
meters which can span a conti 
the 1970s, very few individuals had access to electronic mail, the Internet and Web
nent.
did not exist, and physically mailing magnetic tapes was the primary way to trans 
fer large amounts of data between two locations. In the 1970s, local area networks
were almost nonexistent, and the few existing wide area networks had limited
capacity and restricted access.
As networking technology improved, it became much cheaper and had a much
higher capacity. For example, the first standardized local area network technology
developed about 25 years ago was a version of Ethernet that had a maximum
capacity (also called bandwidth) of 10 million bits per second, typically shared by
tens, if not a hundred, computers. Today, local area network technology offers a
capacity of from 100 million bits per second to a gigabit per second, usually
shared by at most a few computers. Furthermore, lO-gigabit technology is in
development! Optical communications technology has allowed similar growth in
the capacity of wide area networks from hundreds of kilobits to gigabits, and from
hundreds of computers connected to a worldwide network to millions of com put 
ers connected. This combination of dramatic rise in deployment of networking