448 Chapter 6 Enhancing Performance with Plpellnlng
Real Stuff: The Pentium 4 Pipeline
In the last chapter, we discussed how the Pentium 4 fetched and translated IA-32
instructions into microoperations. The microoperations are then executed by a
sophisticated, dynamically scheduled, speculative pipeline capable of sustaining
a execution rate of three microoperations per clock cycle. This section focuses on
tl
that microoperation pipeline. The Pentium 4 combines multiple issue with deep
pipelining so as to achieve both a low CPl and a high clock rate.
When we consider the design of sophisticated, dynamically scheduled proces 
sors, the design of the functional units, the cache and register file, instruction
issue, and overall pipeline control become intermingled, making it difficult to
sepa rate out the datapath from the pipeline. Because of this, many engineers and
microarchitecture The orga  researchers have adopted the term microarchitecture to refer to the detailed
nization ofthe processor, internal architecture of a processor. Figure 6.50 shows the microarchitecture of
including the major functional
the Pentium 4, focusing on the strucnIres for executing the microoperations.
units, their interconnection, and
Another way to look at the Pentium 4 is to see the pipeline stages that a typical
control.
instruction goes through. Figure 6.5 1 shows the pipeline structure and the typical
number of clock cycles spent in each; of course, the number of clock cycles varies
due to the nature of dynamic scheduling as well as the requirements of individual
microoperations.
The Pentium 4, and the earlier Pentium III and Pentium Pro, all use the tech 
nique of decoding IA-32 instructions into microoperations and executing those
microoperations using a speculative pipeline with multiple functional units. In
fact, the basic microarchitecture is similar, and all these processors can complete
up to three microoperations per cycle. The Pentium 4 gains its performance
advantage over the Pentium III through several enhancements:
1. A pipeline that is roughly twice as deep (approximately 20 cycles versus 10)
and can run almost twice as fast in the same technology
2. More functional units (7 versus 5)
3. Support for a larger number of outstanding operations (126 versus 40)
4. The use of a trace cache (see Chapter 7) and a much better branch predictor
(4K entries versus 512)
5. Other enhancements to the memory system, which we discuss in Chapter 7
architectural registers The
instruction set visible registers Elaboration: The Pentium 4 uses a scheme for resolving antidependences and incor 
of a processor; for example, in rect speculation that uses a reorder buffer together with register renaming. Register
MIPS, these are the 32 integer renaming explicitly renames the architectural registers in a processor (8 in the case of
and 16 floating-point registers. IA-32) to a larger set of physical registers (128 in the Pentium 4). The Pentium 4 uses