170 Chapter 3 Arithmetic: for Computers
Elaboration: Two's complement gets its name from the rule that the unsigned sum
n
of an n-bit number and its negative is 2 ; hence, the complement or negation of a two's
n
complement number x is 2 - x.
A third alternative representation is called ones complement. The negative of a
one's complement is found by inverting each bit, from 0 to 1 and from 1 to 0, which
n
helps explain its name since the complement of x is 2 - x - 1. It was also an attempt
to be a better solution than sign and magnitude, and several scientific computers did
use the notation. This representation is similar to two's complement except that it also
has two Os: 00 OOtwo is positive 0 and 11 ... ll is negative O. The most nega-
two
tive number 10 00Otwo represents -2,147,483,647 , and so the positives and
ten
negatives are balanced. One's complement adders did need an extra step to subtract a
number, and hence two's complement dominates today.
A final notation, which we will look at when we discuss floating point, is to represent
the most negative value by 00 ... ooo.wo and the most positive value represented by
biased notation A notation 11. .. ll ' with 0 typically having the value 10 ... OOtwo' This is called a biased
two
that represents the most notation, since it biases the number such that the number plus the bias has a nonneg 
negative value by 00 ... OOOrwo
ative representation.
and the most positive value by
11 ... I1 with 0 typically
,
two
having the value 10 ... 00
1"'0' Elaboration: For signed decimal numbers we used "-" to represent negative
thereby biasing the number
because there are no limits to the size of a decimal number. Given a fixed word size,
such that the number plus the
binary and hexadecimal bit strings can encode the sign, and hence we do not normally
bias has a nonnegative
use "+" or "-" with binary or hexadecimal notation.
representation.
Subtraction: Addition's
Tricky Pal
Addition and Subtraction
No. 10, Top Ten Courses for
Athletes at a Football Factory,
David Letterman et aL, Book of
Top Tell Lists, 1990
Addition is just what you would expect in computers. Digits are added bit by bit
from right to left, with carries passed to the next digit to the left, just as you would
do by hand. Subtraction uses addition: The appropriate operand is simply negated
before being added.
Binary Addition and Subtraction
Let's try adding 6 to 7 in binary and then subtracting 6 from 7 in
ten ten ten ten
EXAMPLE
binary.