352 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
larger computers. Likewise, number of decimal instructions were added to pro 
:I
vide decimal arithmetic on bytes. Such instructions are rarely used today because
using binary arithmetic on 32 bits and converting back and forth to decimal rep 
resentation is considerably faster. Like the protection mechanisms, the decimal
instructions must be implemented in newer processors even if only rarely used.
Concluding Remarks
As we have seen in this dlapter, both the datapath and control for a processor can be
designed starting with the instruction set ardlitecture and an understanding of the
basic characteristics of the technology. In Section 5.3, we saw how the datapath for a
MIPS processor could be constructed based on the architecture and the decision to
build a single-cycle implementation. Of course, the underlying technology also
affects many design decisions by dictating what components can be used in the
datapath, as well as whether a single-cycle implementation even makes sense. Along
the same lines, in the fi rst portion of Section 5.5, we saw how the decision to break
the clock cycle into a series of steps led to the revised multicycle datapath. In both
cases, the top-level organization-a single-cycle or multicycle machine-together
with the instruction set, prescribed many characteristics of the datapath design.
BIG
Control may be designed using one of several initial representations. The
The
choice of sequence control, and how logic is represented, can then be deter 
Picture mined independently; the control can then be implemented with one of
several methods using a structured logic technique. Figure 5.41 shows the
variety of methods for specifYing the control and moving from the specifi 
cation to an implementation using some form of structured logic.
Similarly, the control is largely defined by the instruction set architecture, the
o rganization, and the datapath design. In the single-cycle organization, these
three aspects essentially define how the control signals must be set. In the multicy 
de design, the exact decomposition of the instruction execution into cycles, which
is based on the instruction set architecture, together with the datapath, defines the
requirements on the control.
Control is one of the most challenging aspects of computer design. A major
reason is that designing the control requires an understanding of how all the com -