324 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Actions of the l·blt control signals
Signal name Effect when deasserted Effect when asserted
RegDst The register file destination number for the Write The register file destination number for the Write register comes from the
register comes from the It field. rd field.
Regwrite None. The general.purpose register seleded by the Write register number is
written with the value of the Write data input.
ALUSrcA The first ALU operand is the PC. The first ALU operand comes from the A register.
MemRead None. Content of memory at the location specified by the Address input is put
on Memory data output.
MemWrite None. Memory contents at the location specified by the Address input is
replaced by value on Write data input.
MemtoReg The value fed to the register file Write data input The value fed to the register file Write data input comes from the MDR.
comes from ALUOut.
lorD The PC is used to supply the address to the ALUOut is used to supply the address to the memory unit.
memory unit.
IRWrite None. The output of the memory is written into the IR.
PCWrite None. The PC is written; the source is controlled by PCSource.
PCWriteCond None. The PC is written if the Zero output from the ALU is also active.
Actions of the 2·blt control signals
Signal name Value (binary) Effect
ALUOp 00 The ALU perfonns an add operation.
01 The ALU perfonns a subtract operation.
10 The funct field of the instruction determines the ALU operation.
ALUSrcB 00 The second input to the ALU comes from the B register.
01 The second input to the ALU is the constant 4.
10 The second input to the ALU is the sign.extended, lower 16 bits of the IR.
11 The second input to the ALU is the sign.extended, lower 16 bits of the IR shifted left
2 bits.
PCSource 00 Output of the ALU (PC + 4) is sent to the PC for writing.
01 The contents of ALUOut (the branch target address) are sent to the PC for writing.
10 The jump target address (IR[25:0) shifted left 2 bits and concatenated with
+
PC 4[31:28]) is sent to the PC for writing.
FIGURE 5.29 The action caused by the setting of each control signal In Figure 5.28 on page 323. The top table describes the I-bit
control signals, while thebottom table describes the l-bit signals. Only thosecontrol lines that affect multiplexors h.we an action when theyaredeasserted.
This information is similar to that in Figure 5.16 on page 306 for the single-cycle datap.1th, but adds several new control lines (IRWrite, PCWrite,
PCWriteCond,ALUSrcB, and PCSource) and removes control linesthat are no longer used or have been repbced (PCSrc, Branch, and Jump).
ALU, a designer can use a shared bus and then ensure that only one of the sources is
driving the bus at any point. Although this saves signal lines, the same number of con 
trol lines will be needed to control what goes on the bus. The major drawback to using
such bus structures is a potential performance penalty, since a bus is unlikely to be as
fast as a point-to-point connection.