3.6 Floating Point 213
of these registers. The odd-numbered floating-point registers were used only to load
and store the right half of 64-bit floating-point numbers. MIPS-32 added 1•d and s. d to
the instruction set. MIP&32 also added "paired single" versions of all floating-point
instructions, where a single instruction results in two parallel floating-point operations
on two 32-bit operands inside 64-bit registers. For example, add. ps Fa, F2, F4 is equiv 
alenttoadd.s FO,F2,F4 followedbyadd.s Fl,F3,F5 .
Another reason for separate integers and floating-point registers is that microproces 
sors in the 1980s didn't have enough transistors to put the floating-point unit on the
same chip as the integer unit. Hence the floating-point unit, including the floating-point
registers, were optionally available as a second chip. Such optional accelerator chips
are called coprocessors, and explain the acronym for floating-point loads in MIPS:
1weI
means load word to coprocessor 1, the floating-point unit. (Coprocessor 0 deals
with virtual memory, described in Chapter 7.) Since the early 1990s, microprocessors
have integrated floating point (and just about everything else) on chip, and hence the
term "coprocessor" joins "accumulator" and "core memory" as quaint terms that date
the speaker.
Elaboration: Although there are many ways to throw hardware at floating-point multi 
ply to make it go fast, floating-point division is considerably more challenging to make
fast and accurate. Slow divides in early computers led to removal of divides from many
algorithms, but parallel computers have inspired rediscovery of divide-intensive algo 
rithms that work better on these computers. Hence, we may need faster divides.
One technique to leverage a fast multiplier is Newton's iteration, where division is
1!x,
recast as finding the zero of a function to find the reciprocal which is then multi 
plied by the other operand. Iteration techniques cannot be rounded properly without cal 
culating many extra bits. A Tl chip solves this problem by calculating an extra-precise
reciprocal.
Elaboration: Java embraces IEEE 754 by name in its definition of Java floating-point
data types and operations. Thus, the code in the first example could have well been
generated for a class method that converted Fahrenheit to Celsius.
The second example uses multiple dimensional arrays, which are not explicitly sup 
ported in Java. Java allows arrays of arrays, but each array may have its own length,
unlike multiple dimensional arrays in C. Like the examples in Chapter 2, a Java version
of this second example would require a good deal of checking code for array bounds,
including a new length calculation at the end of row. It would also need to check that
the object reference is not null.
Accurate Arithmetic
Unlike integers, which can represent exactly every number between the smallest
and largest number, floating-point numbers are normally approximations for a
number they can't really represent. The reason is that an infinite variety of real
53
numbers exists between, say, 0 and I, but no more than 2 can be represented