1.3 Under the Covers 25
Although hard drives are not removable, there are several storage technologies
in use that include the following:
• Optical disks, including both compact disks (CDs) and digital video disks
(DVDs), constitute the most common form of removable storage.
• Magnetic tape provides only slow serial access and has been used to back up
disks, in a role now often replaced by duplicate hard drives.
• FLASH-based removable memory cards typically attach by a USB (Universal
Serial Bus) connection and are often used to transfer files.
• Floppy drives and Zip drives are a version of magnetic disk technology with
removable flexible disks. Floppydisks were the original primary storage for floppy disk A portable form of
personal computers, but have now largely vanished. secondarymemory composed of
a rotating mylar platter coated
Optical disk technology works in a completely different way than magnetic disk
with a magnetic recording
technology. In a CD, data is recorded in a spiral fashion, with individual bits being material.
recorded by burning small pits-approximately I micron ( 10--6 meters) in diame 
,,,-into the disk surface. The disk is read by shining a laser at the CD surface and
determining by examining the reflected light whether there is a pit or flat (reflec 
tive) surface. DVDs use the same approach of bouncing a laser beam off a series of
pits and flat surfaces. In addition, there are multiple layers that the laser beam can
be focused on, and the size of each bit is much smaller, which together yield a sig 
nificant increase in capacity.
CD and DVD writers in personal computers use a laser to make the pits in the
recording layer on the CD or DVD surface. This writing process is relatively slow,
taking from tens of minutes (for a full CD) to close to an hour (for a full DVD).
Thus, for large quantities a different technique called pressing is used, which costs
only pennies per CD or DVD.
Rewritable CDs and DVDs use a different recording surface that has a crystal 
line, reflective material; pits are formed that are not reflective in a manner similar
to that for a write-once CD or DVD. To erase the CD or DVD, the surface is
heated and cooled slowly, allowing an annealing process to restore the surface
recording layer to its crystalline structure. These rewritable disks are the most
expensive, with write-once being cheaper; for read-only disks-used to distribute
softwa re, music, or movies-both the disk cost and recording cost are much
lower.
Communicating with Other Computers
We've explained how we can input, compute, display, and save data, but there is
still one missing item found in today's computers: computer networks. Just as the
processor shown in Figure 1.5 on page 16 is connected to memory and I/O
devices, networks connect whole computers, allowing computer users to extend