7.3 Measuring and Improving Cache Performance 493
Writes I" · · I" . . I )
Write-stall cycles X nte miss rate X nte miss pena ty
'v 'v
(
Program
+
Write buffer stalls
Because the write buffer stalls depend on the timing of writes, and not just the
frequency, it is not possible to give a simple equation to compute such stalls. For 
tunately, in systems with a reasonable write buffer depth (e.g., four or more
words) and a memory capable of accepting writes at a rate that significantly
exceeds the average write frequency in programs (e.g., by a factor of two), the
write buffer stalls will be small, and we can safely ignore them. If a system did not
meet these criteria, it would not be well designed; instead, the designer should have
used either a deeper write buffer or a write-back organization.
Write-back schemes also have potential additional stalls arising from the need
to write a cache block back to memory when the block is replaced. We will discuss
this more in Section 7.5.
In most write-through cache o rganizations, the read and write miss penalties
are the same (the time to fetch the block from memory). If we assume that the
write buffer stalls are negligible, we can combine the reads and writes by using a
single miss rate and the miss penalty:
Memory accesses XMiss rate X Miss penalty
Memory-stall clock cycles
Program
We can also factor this as
Misse~
Memory-stall clock cycles = Instructions X XMiss penalty
Program InstructIOn
Let's consider a simple example to help us understand the impact of cache perfor 
mance on processor performance.
Calculating Cache Performance
Assume an instruction cache miss rate for a program is 2% and a data cache EXAMPLE
miss rate is 4%. If a processor has a CPI of 2 without any memory stalls and
the miss penalty is 100 cycles fo r all misses, determine how much faster a pro 
cessor would run with a perfect cache that never missed. Use the instruction
frequencies for SPECint2000 from Chapter 3, Figure 3.26, on page 228.