41
1.8 Exercises
1.51 [IS) <§§ 1.4, 1.5> Assume you are in a company that will market a certain IC
chip. The fixed costs, including R&D, fabrication and equipments, and so on, add
up to $500,000. The cost per wafer is $6000, and each wafer can be diced into 1500
dies. The die yield is 50%. Finally, the dies are packaged and tested, with a cost of
$10 per chip. The test yield is 90%; only those that pass the test wiII be sold to cus 
tomers. If the retail price is 40% more than the cost, at least how many chips have
to be sold to break even?
1.52 [8] <§ 1.6> In this exercise, you will evaluate the performance difference be 
tween two CPU architectures, CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computing) and
RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computing). Generally speaking, CISC CPUs have
more complex instructions than RI SC CPUs and therefore need fewer instructions
to perform the same tasks. However, typically one CISC instruction, since it is
more complex, takes more time to complete than a RISC instruction. Assume that
a certain task needs P CISC instructions and 2P RI SC instructions, and that one
CISC instruction takes 8T ns to complete, and one RI SC instruction takes 2T ns.
Under this assumption, which one has the better performance?
1.53 [IS) <§§ 1.3, 1.6> Suppose there are five com puters connected together to
form a local area network. The maximum data transport rate (bandwidth) that the
network cable can provide is 10 Mbps. Ifwe use a low-end device (Hub) to connect
them, all the computers in the network share the 10 Mbps bandwidth. If we use a
high -end device (Switch), then any two of the com puters can communicate with
each other without disturbing the other computers. If you wa nt to download a 10
MB file from a remote server, which is located outside your local network, how
long will it take if using a Hub? How long wiII it take ifusing a Switch? Assume the
other four computers only communicate with each other, and each has a constant
data rate of 2 Mbps.
1.54 [8] <§1.6> Sometimes softwa re optimization ca n dramatically improve the
performance of a computer system. Assume that a CPU can perform a multiplica 
tion operation in 10 ns, and a subtraction operation in 1 ns. How long will it take
for the CPU to calculate the result of d = a x b - a x c? Could you optimize the
equation so that it wiII take less time?
1.55 [8] <§§ 1.1- 1.5> This book covers abstractions for computer systems at
many different levels of detail. Pick another system with which you are familiar and
write one or two paragraphs describing some of the many different levels of ab 
straction inherent in that system. Some possibilities include automobiles, homes,
airplanes, geometry, the economy, a city, and the government. Be sure to identify
both high-level and low-level abstractions.