382 Chapter 6 Enhancing Performance with Plpellnlng
branch prediction A method A more sophisticated version of branch prediction would have some branches
ofresolving a branch hazard predicted as taken and some as untaken. In our analogy, the dark or home uni 
that assumes a given outcome
forms might take one formula while the light or road uniforms might take
for the branch and proceeds
another. As a computer example, at the bottom of loops are branches that jump
from that assumption rather
back to the top of the loop. Since they are likely to be taken and they branch back 
than waiting to ascertain the
wards, we could always predict taken for branches that jump to an earlier address.
actual outcome.
Such rigid approaches to branch prediction rely on stereotypical behavior and
don't account for the individuality of a specific branch instruction. Dynamic hard 
ware predictors, in stark contrast, make their guesses depending on the behavior
of each branch and may change predictions for a branch over the life of a pro 
gram. Following our analogy, in dynamic prediction a person would look at how
dirty the uniform was and guess at the formula , adjusting the next guess depend 
ing on the success of recent guesses. One popular approach to dynamic prediction
of branches is keeping a history for each branch as taken or untaken, and then
using the recent past behavior to predict the future. As we will see later, the
amount and type of history kept have become extensive with the result being that
dynamic branch predictors can correctly predict branches with over 90% accuracy
(see Section 6.6). \-¥hen the guess is wrong, the pipeline control must ensure that
the instructions following the wrongly guessed branch have no effect and must
restart the pipeline from the proper branch address. In our laundry analogy, we
must stop taking new loads so that we can restart the load that we incorrectly pre 
dicted.
As in the case of all other solutions to control hazards, longer pipelines exacer 
bate the problem, in this case by raising the cost of misprediction. Solutions to
control hazards are described in more detail in Section 6.6.
Elaboration: There is a third approach to the control hazard, called delayed decision.
In our analogy, whenever you are going to make such a decision about laundry, just
place a load of nonfootball clothes in the washer while waiting for football uniforms to
dry. As long as you have enough dirty clothes that are not affected by the test, this solu 
tion works fine.
Called the delayed branch in computers, this is the solution actually used by the
MIPS architecture. The delayed branch always executes the next sequential instruction,
with the branch taking place after that one instruction delay. It is hidden from the MIPS
assembly language programmer because the assembler can automatically arrange the
instructions to get the branch behavior desired by the programmer. MIPS software will
place an instruction immediately after the delayed branch instruction that is not
affected by the branch, and a taken branch changes the address of the instruction that
follows this safe instruction. In our example, the add instruction before the branch in
Figure 6.7 does not affect the branch and can be moved after the branch to fully hide
the branch delay. Since delayed branches are useful when the branches are short, no
processor uses a delayed branch of more than 1 cycle. For longer branch delays, hard 
ware-based branch prediction is usually used.