Perhaps the area of art conservation that ure below, are two images of a painting: one
has been most affected by the availability of shown in normal light (on the left) and one
low-cost, high-performance computation has using the infrared reflectography technique
been painting restoration. Three techniques  (on the right).
infrared reflectography, ultraviolet imaging, Restorers use ultraviolet imaging to look at
and X-radiography- have found the heaviest the original colors of a painting that has been
use. Because of the need for highly precise, retouched. X-radiography provides similar
high resolution imaging, computer controlled information, since white and yellow pigments
cameras or X-ray scanners are used in all these that were covered or painted over appear
techniques. This results in a patchwork of darker due to their lead content.
images, which are then stitched together by a Scanning technologies have also been
computer. The combination of computer con  applied to three-dimensional art objects, such
trolled motion of a camera or X-ray scanner as sculpture. Michelangelo's David was
and subsequent computer composition of tens scanned using a laser range finder by a group
to thousands of images permits that scanning led by Professor Marc Levoy at Stanford. The
of large surfaces at very high resolution. resulting database for a scan with 0.29 mm
Infrared reflectography uses light in the resolution consists of over 2 billion polygons
near-infrared spectrum and a digital camera and 32 gigabytes of data. The Digital Miche 
to detect the intensity of reflection of the light langelo project has created a detailed model of
from the surface of a painting, mural, or the famous sculpture useful both for conser 
fresco. This technique is useful for finding the vation as well as an educational tool for stu 
underdrawing that most artists use to initially dents around the world. Two of the many
sketch out the forms in a painting. The under  images that can be derived from the three 
drawing, typically done in black, often using dimensional scan as shown opposite.
charcoal, absorbs the infrared light. In the fig-
To learn more see these references on
11II
the library
Conserving paintings, a site dedicated to Harvard Uni 
versity's digital imaging lab.
Sistine Chapel, a short background on the Sistine
Chapel.
The Digital Michelangelo project
An Image from the Sistine Chapel In normal light
(left) and In Infrared (right).