8.6 I/O Performance Measures: Examples from Disk and File Systems 597
In ranking of the three ways of doing I/O, which statements are true? Check
Yourself
I. If we wa nt the lowest latency for an I/O operation to a single I/O device, the
order is polling, DMA, and interrupt driven.
2. In terms of lowest impact on processor utilization from a single I/O device,
the order is DMA, interrupt driven, and polling
I/O Performance Measures: Examples
from Disk and File Systems
How should we compare I/O systems? This is a complex question because I/O
performance depends on many aspects of the system and different applications
stress different aspects of the I/O system. Furthermore, a design can make com 
plex trade-offs between response time and throughput, making it impossible to
measure just one aspect in isolation. For example, handling a request as early as
possible generally minimizes response time, although greater throughput can be
achieved if we try to handle related requests together. Accordingly, we may
increase throughput on a disk by grouping requests that access locations that are
close together. Such a policy will increase the response time for some requests,
probably leading to a larger variation in response time. Although throughput will
be higher, some benchmarks constrain the maximum response time to any
request, making such optimizations potentially problematic.
In this section, we give some examples of measurements proposed for deter 
mining the performance of disk systems. These benchmarks are affected by a
variety of system features, including the disk technology, how disks are con 
nected, the memory system, the processor, and the file system provided by the
operating system.
Before we discuss these benchmarks, we need to address a confusing point
about terminology and units. The performance of I/O systems depends on the
rate at which the system transfers data. The transfer rate depends on the clock
9
rate, which is typically given in GHz = 10 cycles per second. The transfer rate is
usually quoted in GB/sec. In I/O systems, GBs are measured using base 10 (i.e., 1
9
GB = 10 = 1,000,000,000 bytes), unlike main memory where base 2 is used (i.e., 1
30
GB = 2 = 1,073,741 ,824). In addition to adding confusion, this difference intro 
duces the need to convert between base 10 (l K = 1000) and base 2 ( IK = 1024)
because many I/O accesses are for data blocks that have a size that is a power of
two. Rather than complicate all our examples by accurately converting one of the
two measurements, we make note here of this distinction and the fact that treating
the two measures as if the units were identical introduces a small error. We illus 
trate this error in Section 8.9.