One challenge is that the stopping distance ability to steer during the severe braking that
for the TGV is nominally four blocks (some  might occur in emergency conditions. By detect 
what shorter in an absolute emergency). The ing wheel lockup and alternately applying and
time to travel four blocks is 1.2 minutes, and releasing the brakes under computer control, an
the newest signaling system trains are run at a antilock brake system can avoid wheel lockup.
3 minute headway, even in fog! So the system Airbags use a force sensor to detect severe
must monitor the presence of all trains and deacceleration, which occurs during a collision.
ensure the most important property: only one The airbags are deployed by a computer that
train ever occupies a block of track at the same reads the sensor. The new generation of airbags
time! The system constantly communicates uses a two-stage deployment: when the deaccel 
the maximum safe speed for the current block, eration indicates a collision of moderate severity,
improving performance and safety. the airbag inflates more slowly, reducing the pos 
The TVM system has been built with eA1ensive sibility of passenger injury from rapid deploy 
attention to safety, which means heavy use of ment in a moderate collision. Reliability of these
redundancy to ensure the operation of the system safety systems has been enhanced by a com 
in the face of failure of a component. The failure puter-controlled test that is run every time the
rate ofTVM has been estimated at less than 1 fail  vehicle is started.
ure in a million years. This attention to safety has Modern ignition systems in automobiles aim to
paid off. in over two decades of service, there have enhance mileage while reducing pollution. Hap 
been no fatal accidents caused by a TVM failure pily these two goals are doubly congruent:
The images on the previous page and below enhancing mileage reduces pollution through the
show the Eurostar TGV and the cab and oper  use of less fuel, and mileage is enhanced by more
ator's seat. effective combustion, which also reduces the
Computers have also played a key role in mak  emission of partially combusted fuel. Computers
ing cars safer, more efficient, and less polluting. control the injection of fuel, the amount of air
The modern automobile has dozens of micro  injected, and the spark timing, which must
processors controlling everything from braking, change as the engine runs faster. Careful control of
to ignition, to air bag deployment. these elements over the full operating range from
In the area of safety, airbags and antilock brakes 1000 to 6000 RPM and different temperature con 
have been two of the most important innovations ditions has helped improve mileage and reduce
since the seat belt. Antilock brakes preserve the pollution.
To learn more see these references on
IIiI
the library
"An investigation of the Therac-25 accidents," Nancy G.
Leveson and Clark S. Tumer.IEEE Computer, 26(7): 18 
41, July 1993.
The Interior of a Eurostar TGV cab.