CH4 Glossary
single-cycle implementation Also called state element A memory element.
single clock cycle implementation. An im  static data The portion of memory that
plementation in which an instruction is ex  contains data whose size is known to the
ecuted in one clock cycle. compiler and whose lifetime is the pro 
small computer systemsinterface (SCSI) A gram's entire execution.
bus lIsed as a standard for I/O devices. static method A method that applies to the
snooping carne coherency A method for whole class rather to an individual object. It
maintaining cache coherency in which all is unrelated to static in C.
cache controllers monitor or snoop on the static multiple issue An approach to im 
bus to detennine whether or not theyhave a plementing a multiple-issue processor
copy of the desired block. where many decisions are madeby the com 
source language The high-level language piler before execution.
in which a program is originally written. static random access memory (SRAM) A
spatial locality The locality principle stat  memorywhere data isstored statically (as in
ing that ifa data location is referenced, data flip-flops) rather than dynamically (as in
locationswith nearby addresses will tend to DRAM). SRAMs are faster than DRAMs,
be referenced soon. but less dense and more expensive per bit.
speculation An approach whereby the sticky bit A bit used in rounding in addi 
compiler or processor guesses the outcome tion to guard and round that is set whenever
of an instruction to remove it as a depen  there are nonzero bits to the right of the
dence in executing other instructions. round bit.
split cache A scheme in which a level ofthe stop In IA-64, an explicit indicator ofa
memory hierarchy is composed of two in  break between independent and dependent
dependent caches that operate in parallel instructions.
with each other with one handling instruc  stored-program concept The idea that in 
tions and one handling data. structions and data of many types can be
split transaction protocol A protocol in stored in memory as numbers, leading to
which the bus is released during a bus trans  the stored program computer.
action while the requester is waiting for the striping Allocation of logically sequential
data to be transmitted, which frees the bus blocks to separate disks to allow higher per 
for access by another requester. formance than a single disk can deliver.
stack pointer A value denoting the most structuralhazard An occurrence in which a
recently allocated address in a stack that planned instruction cannot execute in the
shows where registers should be spilled or proper clock cyclebecause the hardware can 
where old register values can be found. not support the combination ofinstructions
stack segment The portion of memory that areset to execute in the given clock cycle.
used by a program to hold procedure call structural specification Describes how a
frames. digital system is organized in terms of a hi 
stack A data structure for spilling registers erarchical connection of elements.
organized as a last-in-first-out queue. sum of products A form of logical repre 
standby spares Reserve hardware resourc  sentation that employs a logical sum (OR)
es that can immediately take the place of a of products (tenns joined using the AND
failed component. operator).