4.2 CPU Performance and Its Factors 251
where C is the count of the number of instructions of class i executed, CPl is the
j j
average number of cycles per instruction for that instruction class, and n is the
number of instruction classes. Remember that overall CPI for a program will
depend on both the number of cycles for each instruction type and the frequency
of each instruction type in the program execution.
As we described in Chapter 1, the performance of a program depends on the algo  Understanding
rithm, the language, the compiler, the architecture, and the actual hardware. The
Program
following table summarizes how these components affect the factors in the CPU
Performance
performance equation.
Hardware or
software
component Affects what? How?
Algorithm Instruction count, The algorithm determines the number of source program
possibly CPI instructions executed and hence the number of processor
instructions executed. The algorithm may also affect the CPI, by
favoring slower or faster instructions. For example, if the
algorithm uses more f10atinglXlint operations, it will tend to
have a higher CPI.
Programming Instruction count, The programming language certainly affects the instruction
language ePi count, since statements in the language are translated to
processor instructions, which determine instruction count. The
language may also affect the CPI because of its features; for
example, a language with heavy support for data abstraction
(e.g., Java) will require indirect calls, which will use higher.cPI
instructions.
Compiler Instruction count, The efficiency of the compiler affects both the instruction count
ePi and average cycles per instruction, since the compiler
detennines the translation of the source language instructions
into computer instructions. The compiler's role can be very
complex and affect the CPI in complex ways.
Instruction set Instruction count, The instruction set architecture affects all three aspects of CPU
architecture clock rate, perfonnance, since it affects the instructions needed for a
ePi function, the cost in cycles of each instruction, and the overall
clock rate of the processor.