474 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
x,
X,
X, X,
X X
_ _
n 2 n 2
X
X _ _
n 1 n 1
X, X,
X
o
X, X,
a. Before the reference to x" b.After the reference to X
n
FIGURE 7.4 The cache just before and just after a reference to a word X that Is not
n
Initially In the cache. This reference causes a miss that forces the cache to fetch x" from memory and
insert it into the cache.
Figure 7.4 shows such a simple cache, before and after requesting a data item that is
not initially in the cache. Before the request, the cache contains a collection of recent
references XI> X X - 1' and the processor requests a word XII that is not in the
2>••• , n
cache. This request results in a miss, and the word X is brought from memory into
n
cache.
In looking at the scenario in Figure 7.4, there are two questions to
answer: How do we know if a data item is in the cache? Moreover, if it is, how do
we find it? The answers to these two questions are related. If each word can go in
exactly one place in the cache, then it is straightforward to find the word if it is in
the cache. The simplest way to assign a location in the cache for each word in
memo ry is to assign the cache location based on the address of the word in mem  
direct-mapped cache A cache o ry. This cache structure is called direct mapped, since each memory location is
structure inwhich each memory mapped directly to exactly one location in the cache. The typical mapping
location is mapped to exactly
between addresses and cache locations for a direct-mapped cache is usually sim 
one location in the cache.
ple. For example, almost all direct-mapped caches use the mapping
(Block address) modulo (Number of cache blocks in the cache)
This mapping is attractive because if the number of entries in the cache is a power
of two, then modulo ca n be computed simply by using the low-order log2 (cache
size in blocks) bits of the address; hence the cache may be accessed directly with
the low-order bits. For example, Figure 7.5 shows how the memo ry addresses