8.4 Buses and other Connections between Processors, Memory, and i/ O Devlc:es 587
These two chips demonstrate the gradual evolution from parallel shared buses
to high-speed serial point-to-point interconnections with switches via the past
and future versions of ATA and PCI.
Serial ATA is a serial successor to the parallel ATA bus used by magnetic and
optical disks in PCs. The first generation transfers at 150 MB/sec compared to the
100 MB/sec of parallel ATA- 100 bus. Its distance is I meter, twice the maximum
length of ATA- 100. It uses just 7 wires, with one 2-wire data channel in each direc 
tion, compared to 80 for ATA- IOO.
The south bridge in Figure 8.11 demonstrates the transitory period between
parallel buses and serial networks by providing both parallel and serial ATA buses.
pC! Express is a serial successor to the popular PCI bus. Rather than 32-64
shared wires operating at 33 MHz-133 MHz with a peak bandwidth of 132-1064
MB/sec, PCI Express uses just 4 wires in each direction operating at 625 MHz to
offer 300 MB/sec per direction. The bandwidth per pin of PCI Express is 5-10
times its predecessors. A computer ca n then afford to have several PCI Express
interfaces to get even higher bandwidth.
Although the chips in Figure 8.11 only show the parallel PCI bus, Intel plans to
replace the AGP graphics bus and the bus between the north bridge and the south
bridge with PCI Express in the next generation of these chips.
Buses and networks provide electrical interconnection among I/O devices, pro 
cessors, and memory, and also define the lowest-level protocol for communica 
tion. Above this basic level, we must define hardware and software protocols for
controlling data transfers between I/O devices and memory, and for the processor
to specify commands to the I/O devices. These topics are covered in the next sec 
tion.
Both networks and buses connect components together. Which of the following Check
are true about them? Yourself
I. Networks and I/O buses are almost always standardized.
2. Shared media networks and multimaster buses need an arbitration scheme.
3. Local area networks and processor-memory buses are almost always syn 
chronous.
4. High-performance networks and buses use similar techniques compared to
their lower-performance alternatives: they are wider, send many words per
transaction, and have separate address and data lines.