5.9 Real Stuff: The Organization of Recent Pentium Implementations 349
wired. This last level of control expa nds up to three microinstructions into about
120 control lines for the integer datapaths and 275 to over 400 control lines for the
floating-point datapath-the latter number for the new SSE2 instructions
included in the Pentium 4. This last step of expa nding the microinstructions into
control lines is very similar to the control generation for the single-cycle datapath
or for the ALU control.
How is the translation between IA-32 instructions and microinstructions per 
formed? In earlier Pentium implementations (i.e., the Pentium Pro, Pentium II,
and Pentium III), the instruction decode unit would look at up to three IA-32
instructions at a time and use a set of PLAs to generate up to six microinstructions
per cycle. With the significantly higher clock rate introduced in the Pentium 4,
this solution was no longer adequate and an entirely new method of generating
microinstructions was needed.
The solution adopted in the Pentium 4 is to include a trace cache of microin  trace cache An instruction
structions, which is accessed by the IA-32 program counter. A trace cache is a cache that holds a sequence of
instructions with a given start 
sophisticated form of instruction cache, which we explain in detail in Chapter 7.
ing address.; in recent Pentium
For now, think of it as a buffer that holds the microinstructions that implement a
implementations the trace cache
given IA-32 instruction. When the trace cache is accessed with the address of the
holds microoperations rather
next IA-32 instruction to be executed, one of several events occurs:
than IA-32 instructions.
• The tra nslation of the IA-32 instruction is in the trace cache. In this case, up
to three microinstructions are produced from the trace cache. These three
microinstructions represent from one to three IA-32 instructions. The IA-32
PC is advanced one to three instructions depending on how many fit in the
three microinstruction sequence.
• The translation of the IA-32 instmction is in the trace cache, but it requires
more than four microinstmctions to implement. For SUdl complex IA-32
instmctions, there is a microcode ROM; the control unit transfers control to the
microprogram residing in the ROM. Microinstmctions are produced from the
microprogram until the more complex IA-32 instmction has been completed.
The microcode ROM provides a total of more than gooO microinstructions,
with a number of sequences being shared among IA-32 instmctions. Control
then transfers back to fetdling instmctions from the trace cadle.
• The translation of the designated IA-32 instruction is not in the trace cache.
In this case, an IA-32 instruction decoder is used to decode the IA-32
instruction. If the number of microinstructions is four or less, the decoded
microinstructions are placed in the trace cache, where they may be found on
the next execution of this instmction. Otherwise, the microcode ROM is
used to complete the sequence.
From one to three microinstructions are sent from the trace cache to the Pen 
tium 4 microinstruction pipeline, which we describe in detail at the end of Chap 
ter 6. The use of simple low-level hardwired control and simple datapaths for