72 Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
The utility ofan automatic
computer lies in the possibility
Instructions for Making Decisions
of/Ising agiven sequence of
instructiollS repeatedly, the
llumber oftimes it is iterated
What distinguishes:1 computer from a simple calculator is its ability to make
being dependent IIpon the
decisions. Based on the input data and the va lues created during com  
results ofthe computation.
putation, different instructions execute. Decision making is commonly rep 
W7lCfl the iteration is com 
resented in programming languages using the if statement, sometimes
pleted a dif)erent sequence of
combined with go to statements and labels. MIPS assembly language includes
[illstrtlctions] is to befollowed,
two decision-making instructions, similar to an ifstatement with a go to. The
so we must, ill most roses, give
first instruction is
parallel of{instmc 
two traillS
tions] preceded by an illStruc 
beq regi st e r l , r egi st e r 2 , L1
tion as to which routine is to be
This instruction mea ns go to the statement labeled Ll jfthe value in regi s t e r l
followed. This choice be
call
equals the value in r eg i s t e r 2. The mnemonic beq stands for branch if equal.
made to depend upon the sign
The second instruction is
ofa number (zero being m::k 
oned asplusfor machine pur 
bne registe r l , regis t e r 2 , Ll
poses). COllSequcntly, we
introducean {instruction] (the
It means go to the statement labeled L1 if the value in reg i s t e r 1 does flot equal
conditional tramfer (instmc  the value in r egi s t er2. The mnemonic bne stands for branch if flot equal.
tioll}) which will, depending These two instructions are traditionally called conditional branches.
on the sign ofagiven Illlmber,
calise the proper olle oftwo
routines to be exeruted.
Burks, Goldstine, and von
Neumann, 1947
Compiling if·the~lse into Conditional Branches
EXAMPLE In the following code segment, f , g, h, i , and j are variables. If the five vari 
ables f through j correspond to the five registers $sO through $s 4, what is
the compiled MIPS code for this C if statement?
i f (i j) f 9 + h ; else f 9 - h ;
== = =
Figure 2.11 is a flowchart of what the MIPS code should do. The first expres 
ANSWER
sion compares for equality, so it would seem that we would want beq. In gen 
eral, the code will be more efficient if we test for the opposite condition to
branch over the code that performs the subsequent then part of the if (the la 
bel E1s e is defined below):.
bne $s3 ,$ s 4,E lse # go t o Else if ~ J
1