1.2 Below Your Program 11
2. As mentioned earlier, both the software and hardwa re affect the perfor 
mance of a program. Can you think of examples where each of the follow 
ing is the right place to look for a performance bottleneck?
• The algorithm chosen
• The programming language or compiler
• The operating system
• The processor
• The I/O system and devices
In Paris they simply stared
when 1spoke to them in
Below Your Program
French; I never did succeed
in making those idiots
understand their own lan 
A typical application, such as a word processor or a large database system, may
guage.
consist of hundreds of thousands to millions of lines of code and rely on sophisti 
Mark Twain, The llllloeellts
cated software libraries that implement complex fun ctions in support of the
Abroad, 1869
application. As we will see, the hardware in a computer can only execute extremely
simple low-level instructions. To go from a complex application to the simple
instructions involves several layers of software that interpret or translate high 
level operations into simple computer instructions.
These layers of software are organized primarily in a hierarchical fashion, with
applications being the outermost ring and a variety of systems software sitting systems software Software
that provides services that are
between the hardwa re and applications softwa re, as shown in Figure 1.3.
commonly useful, including
There are many types of systems software, but two types of systems software are
operating systems, compilers,
central to every computer system today: an operating system and a compiler. An
and assemblers.
operating system interfaces between a user's program and the hardware and pro 
operating system Supervising
vides a variety of services and supervisory functions. Among the most important
program that manages the
functions are
resources ofa computer for the
• handling basic input and output operations benefit ofthe programs that run
on that machine.
• allocating storage and memory
• providing for sharing the computer among multiple applications using it
simultaneously
compiler A program that
Examples of operating systems in use today are Windows, Linux, and MacOS.
translates high-level language
Compilers perform another vital function: the translation of a program writ 
statements into assembly
ten in a high-level language, such as C or Java, into instructions that the hardwa re language statements.