346 Chapter 5 The Processor: Datapath and Control
Elaboration: If you examine the finite state machine in Figure 5.40 closely, you can
see that some problems could occur in the way the exceptions are handled. For exam·
pie, in the case of arithmetic overflow, the instruction causing the overflow completes
writing its result because the overflow branch is in the state when the write completes.
However, it's possible that the architecture defines the instruction as having no effect if
the instruction causes an exception; this is what the MIPS instruction set architecture
specifies. In Chapter 7, we will see that certain classes of exceptions require us to pre 
vent the instruction from changing the machine state, and that this aspect of handling
exceptions becomes complex and potentially limits performance.
Check Is this optimization proposed in the Check Yourself on page 340 concerning
PCSource still valid in the extended control for exceptions shown in Figure 5.40
Yourself
on page 345? Why or why not?
Microprogramming: Simplifying
Control Design
Microprogramming is a technique for designing complex control units. It uses a
very simple hardware engine that can then be programmed to implement a
more complex instruction set. Microprogramming is used today to implement
some parts of a complex instruction set, such as a Pentium, as well as in special 
purpose processors. This section, which appears on the CD, explains the basic
concepts and shows how they can be used to implement the MIPS multicycle
control.
An Introduction to Digital Design Using a
Hardware Design Language
Modern digital design is done using hardware description languages and modern
computer-aided synthesis tools that can create detailed hardware designs from the
descriptions using both libraries and logic synthesis. Entire books are written on
such languages and their use in digital design. This section, which appears on the
CD, gives a brief introduction and shows how a hardware design language, Verilog
in this case,can be used to describe the MIPS multicycle control both behaviorally
and in a form suitable for hardware synthesis.