Block discovered that bluefin tuna travel more canisters in these trees. Each micromote is less
than 10,000 miles per year; tuna tagged near the than 3 cubic inches, can transmit up to 40 KBf
East Coast of the United States will cross the sec, and can run for months on a C battery.
Atlantic and spawn in both the Gulf of Mexico Since micromotes are small and cheap, many
and the Eastern Mediterranean. Her discovery can be placed in a tree. Data is collected with a
changed regulations so that tuna are no longer compatible laptop by simply walking to the
managed separately in the Eastern and Western base of the tree.
Atlantic. She is now developing a census of Dawson found that summertime fog
Pacific marine life using smaller tags for smaller accounts for 25% to 40% of the water that the
animals and tags that transmit each time a fish redwoods receive for the whole year. The trees
surfaces. She speculates that tagged tuna could may even be drinking water directly from fog
be ideal "vehicles" to monitor ocean change. via a symbiotic relationship with fungi living
Berkeley biologist Todd Dawson studies the on their leaves.
ecology of the coastal redwood, Sequoia sem  Dawson predicts wireless sensor networks
pervirens, particularly the interaction of sea will change the way people do ecological
fog with trees. For years his research involved research.
installing 50 kilograms of gear and kilometers
of wire strung to sensors. This work is often To learn more see these references on
Ii
done more than 80 meters above the ground. the library
Data could only be retrieved by climbing up to
Block et aI., "Migratory movements, depth preferences,
a printer-sized data logger.
and thermal biology of atlantic bluefin tuna:' Scie/lce
293: 1310-14,2001
Berkeley computer scientist David Culler
proposed a new approach. Dawson is now plac  "Redwoods:' Prof. Dawson's laboratory site
ing miniature wireless sensors the size of film
"Redwood's drinking water from fog," Tile Forestry
SOI/rce, Nov. 2002
"Tagging of the Pacific Pelagics," www.toppcensus.org
The Mica mlcromote with C battery. It Is about the
Professor Dawson and student climbing a sequoia
size of a film canister.
to Install fog monitors.