8.2 Disk Storage and Dependability 571
+
Average disk access time is equal to Average seek time Average rotational
ANSWER
+ +
delay Transfer time Controller overhead. Using the advertised average
seek time, the answer is
6.0 ms + 0.5 rotation + ~ + 0.2 ms 6.0 + 3.0 + 0.01 + 0.2 9.2 ms
10,000 RPM 50 MB/sec
If the measured average seek time is 25% of the advertised average time, the
answer
IS
+ + +
1.5 ms 3.0 ms 0.01 ms 0.2 ms = 4.7 ms
Notice that when we consider measured average seek time, as opposed to
advertised average seek time, the rotational latency can be the largest compo 
nent of the access time.
Disk densities have continued to increase for more than 50 years. The impact
of this compounded improvement in density and the reduction in physical size of
a disk drive has been amazing, as Figure 8.3 shows. The aims of different disk
designers have led to a wide variety of drives being available at any particular time.
Figure 8.4 shows the characteristics of three magnetic disks. In 2004, these disks
from a single manufacturer cost between $0.50 and $5 per gigabyte, depending on
size, interface, and performance. The smaller drive has advantages in power and
volume per byte.
Elaboration: Most disk controllers include caches. Such caches allow for fast
access to data that was recently read between transfers requested by the CPU. They
use write through and do not update on a write miss. They often also include prefetch
algorithms to try to anticipate demand. Of course, such capabilities complicate the
measurement of disk performance and increase the importance of workload choice.
Dependability, Reliability, and Availability
Users crave dependable storage, but how do you define it? In the computer indus 
try, it is harder than looking it up in the dictionary. After considerable debate, the
following is considered the standard definition (Laprie 1985):
Computer system dependability is the quality ofdelivered service such that reli 
ance mn justifiably be placed on this service. The service delivered by a system
is its observed actllal behavior as perceived by other system(s) interacting with
this system's users. Each module also has an ideal specified behavior, where a
service specification is an agreed description ofthe expected behavior. A system
faillire occurs when the actual behavior deviates from the specified behavior.