262 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
increase. One comparison that is particularly interesting is the SPEC CINT2000
and CFP2000 measurement divided by the clock rate in MHz. The following
tables summarizes the average value of this ratio across different clock rates for
each processor:
Ratio Pentium III Pentium 4
CINT2000 / Clock rate in MHz 0.47 0.36
CFP2000/ Clock rate in MHz 0.34 0.39
Metrics such as benchmark performance divided by clock rate are sometimes
thought of as measurements of implementation efficiency, although, as we have
seen, one cannot separate the interaction of clock rate and other improvements.
These measurements are particularly interesting because of the differences between
the integer and floating-point bendlmarks. The CINT2000 performance ratios are
typical: when a faster version of a processor is introduced it may sacrifice one aspect of
a design (such as CPI) to enhance another (SUdl as clock rate). Assuming one com 
piler for both processors, and hence identical code, the CINT2000 ratios tell us that
the CPI of the Pentium 4 is 1.3 (0.47/0.36) times that of the Pentium 3.
How then ca n these numbers be reversed for the floating-point benchmarks?
The answer is that the Pentium 4 provides a set of new instructions (called the
Streaming SIMD Extensions 2; see Chapter 3) that provide a significant boost for
floating point. Thus, both the instruction count and the CPI for the Pentium 4
will differ from that of the Pentium 3, producing improved performance.
SPECweb99: A Throughput Benchmark for Web Servers
In 1996, SPEC introduced its first benchmark designed to measure Web server
performance; the benchmark was superseded by a new version in 1999.
SPECweb99 differs from SPEC CPU in a number of ways:
• SPECweb99 focuses on throughput, measuring the maximum number of
connections that a system running as a Web server can support. The system
must provide response to a client request within a bounded time and with a
bounded number of errors.
• Because SPECweb99 measures throughput, multiprocessors (systems with
more than one CPU) are often used in benchmarks.
• SPECweb99 provides only a program to generate Web server requests; the
\Veb server software becomes part of the system being measured.
• SPECweb99 performance depends on a wide measure of system characteris 
tics, including the disk system and the network.