•••
6.10 Real Stuff: The Pentium 4 Pipeline
Instruction prefetch
and decode
Branch
prediction
Trace cache
Microoperation queue
Register file
Dispatch and register remaining
I I I
Integer and floating-point operation queue Memory operation queue
I I I I I I
Complex Floating
Integer Integer Load Store
instruction point
I
Commit
unit
Data
cache
FtGURE 6.50 The mlcroarchltecture of the Intel Pentium 4. The extensive queues allow up to 126 microoperations to be outstanding at
any point in time, including 48 loads and 24 stores. There are actually seven functional units, since the FP unit includes a separate dedicated lUlit for
floating-point moves. The load and store units are actually separated into two p.uts, with the first part handling address calculation and the second
part responsible for the actual memory reference. The integer ALUs operate at twice the clock frequency, allowing two integer ALU operations to be
completed by each of the two imeger units in a single clock cycle. As we described in Chapter 5, the Pentium 4 uses a special cache, called the trace
cache, to hold predecoded sequences of microoperations, corresponding to IA-32 instructions. The operation of a trace cache is explained in more
detail in Chapter 7. The FP unit also handles the MMX multimedia and SSE2 instructions. There is an extensive bypass network among the functional
units; since the pipeline is dynamic rather than static, bypassing is done by tagging results and tracking source operands, so as to allow a match when a
result is produced for an instruction in one ofthe queuesthat net'ds the result. Intel is expected to release newversions ofthe Pentium 4 in 2004, which
will probably have changes in the microorchitecture.
-
~r='-~~::~B-I ,~~
-
~-I=ill-
rg =rn- =rn-
,':;;~' ~
-
•
, , , , ,
Number 01
•
dockcydas
FtGURE 6.51 The Pentium 4 pipeline showing the pipeline flow for a typical Instruction
and the number of clock cycles for the major steps In the pipeline. The major buffers where
instructions wait are also shown.