Computers
Information Technology for the 4
in the
Billion without IT
Real World
Throughout this book you will see sections what they wanted neA't, villagers said they
entitled "Computers in the Real World." These wanted access to the Internet! First, they
sections describe compelling uses for comput  wanted to learn the prices before taking their
ers outside of their typical functions in office crops to the nearest market, which is 35 kilo 
automation and data processing. The goal of meters away. They could also learn about the
these sections is to illustrate the diversity of market abroad to make better decisions on
uses for information technology. what crops to grow and to increase their bar 
gaining power when it was time to sell them.
Problem to solve: Make information tech  Second, they wanted to use Internet telephony
nology available to the rest of humanity, such to talk to relatives in Laos and beyond.
as farmers in rural villages, beyond a multilin  The goal was "a rugged computer and
gual character set like Unicode. printer assembled from off-the-shelf compo 
nents that draws less than 20 watts in normal
Solution: Develop a computer, software, and use- less than 70 watts when the printer is
a communication system for a rural farming printing-and that can survive dirt, heat, and
village. However, there is no electricity, no
immersion in water."
telephone, no technical support, and the vil 
The resulting Jhai PC design uses flash
lagers do not read English. memory instead of a disk drive, thereby elimi 
The Jhai Foundation took on this challenge nating moving parts from the PC to make it
for five villages in the Hin Heup district of more rugged and easier to maintain. Rather
Laos. This American-Lao foundation was than use a power-hungry cathode ray tube, it
founded to raise the standard of living for has a liquid-crystal display. To lower costs and
rural Laos by developing an export economy.
power, it uses an 80486 microprocessor. The
It also built schools, installed wells, and
power is supplied by a car battery, which can
started a weaving cooperative. When asked be charged by a turning bicycle crank. An old