1.3 Under the Covers 23
A Safe Place for Data
Thus far we have seen how to input data, compute using the data, and display
memory The storage area in
data. If we were to lose power to the computer, however, everything would be lost which programs are kept when
because the memory inside the computer is volatile-that is, when it loses power, they are running and that con 
tains the data needed by the
it forgets. In contrast, a cassette tape for a stereo doesn't forget the recorded music
runmng programs.
when you turn off the power because the tape is magnetic and is thus a nonvola 
tile memory technology. volatile memory Storage, such
To distinguish between the memory used to hold programs while they are run  as DRAM, that only retains data
ning and this nonvolatile memory used to store programs between runs, the term only ifit is receiving power.
primary memory or main memory is used for the former, and secondary mem 
nonvolatile memory A form
ory for the latter. DRAMs have dominated main memory since 1975, but mag  ofmemory that retains data
netic disks have dominated secondary memory since 1965. In embedded even in the absence ofa power
source and that is used to store
applications, FLASH, a nonvolatile semiconductor memory is also used.
programs between runs. Mag 
Today the primary nonvolatile storage used on all desktop and server comput 
netic disk is nonvolatile and
ers is the magnetic hard disk. As Figure 1.11 shows, a magnetic hard disk consists
DRAM is not.
of a collection of platters, which rotate on a spindle at 5400 to 15,000 revolutions
primary memory Also called
per minute. The metal platters are covered with magnetic recording material on
main memory. Volatile memory
both sides, similar to the material found on a cassette or video tape. To read and
used to hold programs while
write information on a hard disk, a movable arm containing a small electromag 
they are running; typically
netic coil called a read/write head is located just above each surface. The entire
consists ofDRAM in today's
drive is permanently sealed to control the environment inside the drive, which, in
computers.
turn, allows the disk heads to be much closer to the drive surface.
secondary memory Non 
Diameters of hard disks vary by more than a fa ctor of 3 today, from less than I
volatile memory used to store
inch to 3.5 inches, and have been shrunk over the years to fit into new products;
programs and data between
workstation servers, personal computers, laptops, palmtops, and digital cameras
runs; typically consists ofmag 
have all inspired new disk form factors. Traditionally, the widest disks have the netic disks in today's computers.
highest performance, the smallest disks have the lowest unit cost, and the best cost
magnetic disk (also called
per megabyte is usually a disk in between. Although most hard drives appear
hard disk) A form ofnonvola 
inside computers (as in Figure 1.8), hard drives can also be attached using external
tile secondary memory com 
interfaces such as Firewire or USB. posed ofrotating platters coated
The use of mechanical components means that access times for magnetic disks with a magnetic recording
material.
are much slower than for DRAMs: disks typically take 5-15 milliseconds, while
DRAMs take 40--80 nanoseconds-making DRAMs about 100,000 times faster.
megabyte Traditionally
Yet disks have much lower costs than DRAM for the same storage capacity because 1,048,576 (220) bytes, although
the production costs for a given amount of disk storage are lower than for the some communications and sec 
ondary storage systems have
same amount of integrated circuit. In 2004, the cost per megabyte of disk is about
redefined it to mean 1,000,000
100 times less expensive than DRAM.
6
(10 bytes.
)
Thus there are three primary differences between magnetic disks and main
memory: disks are nonvolatile because they are magnetic; they have a slower
access time because they are mechanical devices; and they are cheaper per mega 
byte because they have very high storage capacity at a modest cost.