514 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
portion. The number of bits in the page-offset field determines the page size. The
number of pages addressable with the virtual address need not match the number
of pages addressable with the physical address. Having a larger number of virtual
pages than physical pages is the basis for the illusion of an essentially unbounded
amount of virtual memory.
Many design choices in virtual memory systems are motivated by the high cost
of a miss, which in virtual memory is traditionally called a page fault. A page fault
will take millions of clock cycles to process. (The table on page 469 shows that
main memory is about 100,000 times faster than disk.) This enormous miss pen 
alty, dominated by the time to get the first word for typical page sizes, leads to sev 
eral key decisions in designing virtual memory systems:
• Pages should be large enough to try to amortize the high access time. Sizes
from 4 KB to 16 KB are typical today. New desktop and server systems are
being developed to support 32 KB and 64 KB pages, but new embedded sys 
tems are going in the other direction, to 1 KB pages.
• Organizations that reduce the page fault rate are attractive. The primary tech 
nique used here is to allow fully associative placement of pages in memory.
• Page faults can be handled in software because the overhead will be small
compared to the disk access time. In addition, software can afford to use
clever algorithms for choosing how to place pages because even small reduc 
tions in the miss rate will pay for the cost of such algorithms.
• Write-through will not work for virtual memory, since writes take too long.
Instead, virtual memory systems use write-back.
The next few subsections address these factors in virtual memory design.
Elaboration: Although we normally think of virtual addresses as much larger than
physical addresses, the opposite can occur when the processor address size is small rel 
ative to the state of the memory technology. No single program can benefit, but a collec 
tion of programs running at the same time can benefit from not having to be swapped to
memory or by running on parallel processors. Given that Moore's law applies to DRAM,
32-bit processors are already problematic for servers and soon for desktops.
segmentation A variable-size
Elaboration: The discussion of virtual memory in this book focuses on paging, which
address mapping scheme in
uses fixed-size blocks. There is also a variable-size block scheme called segmentation.
which an address consists oft",'O
In segmentation, an address consists of two parts: a segment number and a segment
parts: a segment number, which
offset. The segment register is mapped to a physical address, and the offset is added
is mapped to a physical address,
to find the actual physical address. Because the segment can vary in size, a bounds
and a segment offset.
check is also needed to make sure that the offset is within the segment. The major use