472 Chapter 7 Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy
memory hierarchies to get good performance. We show how important this
understanding is with two examples.
Since memory systems are so critical to performance, computer designers have
devoted lot of attention to these systems and developed sophisticated mecha 
:I
nisms for improving the performance of the memory system. In this chapter, we
will see the major conceptual ideas, although many simplifications and abstrac 
tions have been used to keep the material manageable in length and complexity.
We could easily have written hundreds of pages on memory systems, as dozens of
recent doctoral theses have demonstrated.
Check
Which of the following statements are generally true?
Yourself
I. Caches take advantage of tem poral locality.
2. On a read, the value returned depends on which blocks are in the cache.
3. Most of the cost of the memory hierarchy is at the highest level.
BIG
Programs exhibit both temporal locality, the tendency to reuse recently
The
accessed data items, and spatial locality, the tendency to reference data
Picture items that are close to other recently accessed items. Memory hierarchies
take advantage of temporal locality by keeping more recently accessed
data items closer to the processor. Memory hierarchies take advantage of
spatial locality by moving blocks consisting of multiple contiguous words
in memory to upper levels of the hierarchy.
Figure 7.3 shows that a memory hierarchy uses smaller and faster
memory technologies close to the processor. Thus, accesses that hit in the
highest level of the hierarchy can be processed quickly. Accesses that miss
go to lower levels of the hierarchy, which are larger but slower. If the hit
rate is high enough, the memory hierarchy has an effective access time
close to that of the highest (and fastest) level and a size equal to that of
the lowest (and largest) level.
In most systems, the memory is a true hierarchy, meaning that data
cannot be present in level i unless it is also present in level i + I.