8.2 Disk Storage and Dependability 56.
focused on response time and diversity of I/O devices, while server systems are
more focused on throughput and expandability of I/O devices.
Disk Storage and Dependability
As mentioned in Chapter I, magnetic disks rely on a rotating platter coated with a
magnetic surface and use a moveable read/write head to access the disk. Disk stor 
age is nonvolatile-the data remains even when power is removed. A magnetic nonvolatile Storage device
disk consists of a collection of platters (1-4), each of which has two recordable where data retains its value even
when power is removed.
disk surfaces. The stack of platters is rotated at 5400 to 15,000 RPM and has a
diameter from an inch to just over 3.5 inches. Each disk surface is divided into
concentric circles, called tracks. There are typically 10,000 to 50,000 tracks per track One ofthousands ofcon 
surface. Each track is in turn divided into sectors that contain the information; centric circles that makes up the
surface ofa magnetic disk.
each track may have 100 to 500 sectors. Sectors are typically 512 bytes in size,
although there is an initiative to increase the sector size to 4096 bytes. The
sector One of the segments
sequence recorded on the magnetic media is a sector number, a gap, the informa  that make up a track on a mag 
III netic disk; a sector is the small 
tion for that sector including error correction code (see Appendix B, page B 
est amount ofinformation that
64), a gap, the sector number of the next sector, and so on. Originally, all tracks
is read or written on a disk.
had the same number of sectors and hence the same number of bits, but with the
introduction of zone bit recording (ZBR) in the early 1990s, disk drives changed
to a varying number of sectors (and hence bits) per track, instead keeping the
spacing between bits constant. ZBR increases the number of bits on the outer
tracks and thus increases the drive capacity.
As we saw in Chapter I, to read and write information the read/write heads
must be moved so that they are over the correct location. The disk heads for each
surface are connected together and move in conjunction, so that every head is
over the same track of every surface. The term cylinder is used to refer to all the
tracks under the heads at a given point on all surfaces.
To access data, the operating system must direct the disk through a three-stage
process. The first step is to position the head over the proper track. This operation
is called a seek, and the time to move the head to the desired track is called the seek The process ofpositioning
seek time. a read/write head over the
proper track on a disk.
Disk manufacturers report minimum seek time, maximum seek time, and
average seek time in their manuals. The first two are easy to measure, but the aver 
age is open to wide interpretation because it depends on the seek distance. The
industry has decided to calculate average seek time as the sum of the time for all
possible seeks divided by the number of possible seeks. Average seek times are
usually advertised as 3 ms to 14 ms, but, depending on the application and sched 
uling of disk requests, the actual average seek time may be only 25% to 33% of the