G-ll
Glossary
overflow (floating-point) A situation in alway associated with the correct instruc 
which a positive exponent becomes too tion in pipelined computers.
large to fit in the exponent field. predication A technique to make instruc 
package Basically a directory that contains tions dependent on predicates rather than
a group of related classes. on branches.
page fault An event that occurs when an ac  prefetching A technique in which data
cessed page is not present in main memory. blocks needed in the future are brought into
page table The table containing the virtual the cache early by the use of special instruc 
to physical address translations in a virtual tions that specify the address of the block.
memory system. The table,which is stored in primary memory Also called main memo 
memory, is typically indexed by the virtual ry. Volatile memory used to hold programs
page number;each entryin the table contains while they are running; typically consists of
the physical page number for that virtual DRAM in today's computers.
page ifthe page is currently in memory. procedure A stored subroutine that per 
parallel processing program A single pro  forms a specific task based on the parame 
gram that runs on multiple processors si  ters with which it is provided.
multaneously. procedure call frame A block of memory
PC-relative addressing An addressing re  that is used to hold values passed to a proce 
gime in which the address is the sum of the dure as arguments, to save registers that a pro 
program counter (PC) and a constant in the cedure may modify but that the procedure's
instruction. caller does not want changed, and to provide
physical address An address in main space for variables local to a procedure.
memory. procedure frame Also called activation
physically addressed cache A cache that is record. The segment of the stack contain 
addressed by a physical address. ing a procedure's saved registers and local
pipeline stall Also called bubble. A stall variables.
initiated in order to resolve a hazard. processor-memory bus A bus that con 
pipelining An implementation technique nects processor and memory and that is
in which multiple instructions are over  short, generally high speed, and matched to
lapped in execution, much like to an assem  the memory system so as to maximize
bly line. memory-processor bandwidth.
pixel The smallest individual picture ele  program counter (PC) The register con 
ment. Screen are composed of hundreds of taining the address of the instruction in the
thousands to millions ofpixels, organized in program being executed
a matrix. programmable array logic
poison A result generated when a specula  (PAL) Contains a programmable and 
tive load yields an exception, or an instruc  plane followed by a fixed or-plane.
tion uses a poisoned operand. programmable logic array (PLA) A struc 
polling The process of periodically check  tured-logic element composed of a set of in 
ing the status of an I/O device to determine puts and corresponding input complements
the need to service the device. and two stages oflogic: the first generating
precise interrupt Also called precise ex  product terms of the inputs and input com 
ception. An interrupt or exception that is plements and the second generating sum