1.4 Real Stuff: Manufacturing Pentium 4 Chips 29
Let's start at the beginning. The manufacture of a chip begins with silicon, a
silicon A natural element
substance found in sand. Because silicon does not conduct electricity well, it is which is a semiconductor.
called a semiconductor. With a special chemical process, it is possible to add
semiconductor A substance
materials to silicon that allow tiny areas to transform into one of three devices:
that does not conduct electricity
well.
• Excellent conductors of electricity (using either microscopic copper or alu 
minum wire)
• Excellent insulators from electricity (like plastic sheathing or glass)
• Areas that can conduct or insulate under special conditions (as a switch)
Transistors fall in the last category. A VLSI circuit, then, is just billions of combi 
nations of conductors, insulators, and switches manufactured in a single, small
package.
The manufacturing process for integrated circuits is critical to the cost of the
chips and hence important to computer designers. Figure 1.14 shows that process.
The process starts with a silicon crystal ingot, which looks like a giant sausage. silicon crystal ingot A rod
Today, ingots are 8-12 inches in diameter and about 12-24 inches long. An ingot composed ofa silicon crystal
that is between 6 and 12 inches
is finely sliced into wafers no more than 0. 1 inch thick. These wafers then go
in diameter and about 12 to 24
through a series of processing steps, during which patterns of chemicals are placed
inches long.
wafer A slice from a silicon
ingot no more than 0. 1inch
Blank
thick, used to create chips.
Silicon ingot wafers
C_ _) -_. I I
51,,,, 20 to 40
• •
processing steps
./
I
Tested dies Tested Patterned wafers
DD wafer
I. ,
D ~ D l8I
.-~
Bond die to .,~_ DDDDD ~,~_ Wafer
Dicer
D D I8l D D
package tester
D ODD
DD
I
Packaged dies Tested packaged dies
1i:iI1i:iI1i:iI __
P,rt Ship to
IQIIQIIQI .
tester customers
FIGURE 1.14 The chip manufacturing process. After being sliced from the silicon ingot, blank
wafers are put through 20 to 40 steps to create patterned wafers (see Figure 1.15 on page 31). These pat 
terned wafers are then tested with a wafer tester and a map of the good parts is m.1de. Then, the wafers are
diced into dies (see Figure 1.9 on page 21). ln this figure, one wafer produced 20 dies, of which 17 passed
testing.(X means the die is b.1d.) The yield ofgood dies in this case was 17/20, or 85%. These good dies are
then bonded into packages and tested one more time before shipping the packaged parts to customers.One
bad packaged part was found in this final test.