198 Chapter 3 Arithmetic: for Computers
shifting to the right, but if one number were positive and the other were
negative, it would be possible for the sum to have many leading Os, requir 
ing left shifts. Whenever the exponent is increased or decreased, we must
check for overflow or underflow-that is, we must make sure that the ex 
ponent still fits in its field.
Step 4. Since we assumed that the significa nd can be only four digits long (exclud 
ing the sign), we must round the number. In our grammar school algo 
rithm, the rules tnmcate the number if the digit to the right ofthe desired
point is between 0 and 4 and add I to the digit if the number to the right
is between 5 and 9. The number
2
1.00 15,<'n X 10
is rounded to four digits in the significand to
2
1.002 X 10
ten
since the fourth digit to the right of the decimal point was between Sand
9. Notice that ifwe have bad luck on rounding, such as adding I to a string
of 9s, the sum may no longer be normalized and we would need to per 
form step 3 again.
Figure 3.1 6 shows the algorithm for binary floating-point addition that follows
this decimal example. Steps I and 2 are similar to the exa mple just
discussed: adjust the significand of the number with the smaller exponent and
then add the two significands. Step 3 normalizes the results, forcing a check for
overflow or underflow. The test for overflow and underflow in step 3 depends on
the precision of the operands. Recall that the pattern of all zero bits in the expo 
nent is reserved and used for the floating-point representation of zero. Also, the
pattern of all one bits in the exponent is reserved for indicating values and situa 
tions outside the scope of normal floating-point numbers (see the Elaboration on
page 2 17). Thus, for single precision, the maximum exponent is 127, and the min 
imum exponent is - 126. The limits for double precision are 1023 and - 1022.
Decimal Floating-Point Addition
Try adding the numbers O.Sten and -0.437S in binary using the algorithm
ten
EXAMPLE
in Figure 3.16.