3.4 Multiplication 179
clock cycle, this algorithm would require almost 100 clock cycles to multiply two
32-bit numbers. The relative importance of arithmetic operations like multiply
varies with the program, but addition and subtraction may be anywhere from 5 to
100 times more popular than multiply. Accordingly, in many applications, multi 
ply can take multiple clock cycles without significantly affecting performance. Yet
Amdahl's law (see Chapter 4, page 267) reminds us that even a moderate fre 
quency for a slow operation can limit perfo rmance.
This algorithm and hardware are easily refined to take 1 clock cycle per step.
The speedup comes from performing the operations in parallel: the multiplier
and multiplicand are shifted while the multiplicand is added to the product if the
multiplier bit is a one. The hardware just has to ensure that it tests the right bit of
the multiplier and gets the preshifted version of the multiplicand. The hardware is
usually further optimized to halve the width of the adder and registers by noticing
where there are unused portions of registers and adders. Figure 3.7 shows the
revised hardwa reo
Replacing arithmetic by shifts can also occur when multiplying by constants. Hardware
Some compilers replace multiplies by short constants with a series of shifts and
Software
adds. Because one bit to the left represents a number twice as large in base 2, shift 
Interface
ing the bits left has the same effect as multiplying by a power of 2. As mentioned
in Chapter 2, almost every com piler will perform the strength reduction optimi 
zation of substituting a left shift for a multiply by a power of 2.
Multiplicand
32 bits
/'
""" 32-bit ALU
•
PreJUcl Shift right Control'
Write test
64 bits
FIGURE 3.7 Relined version of the multiplication hardware. Compare WIth the first versIon m
Figure 3.5. The Multiplicand register, ALU, and Multiplier register are aU 32 bits wide, with only the Prod·
uct register left at 64 bits. Nowthe product is shifted right. The separate Multiplier register also dis.1ppeared.
The multiplier is placed instead in the right half of the Product register. These changes are highlighted in
color.