94 Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
Latin Malayalam Tagbanwa General Punctuation
Greek Sinhala Khmer Spacing Modifier Letters
Cyrillic Thai Mongolian Currency Symbols
Armenian L" Limbu Combining Diacritical Marks
Hebrew Tibetan Tai Le Combining Marks for Symbols
Arabic Myanmar Kangxi Radicals Superscripts and Subscripts
5yriac Georgian Hiragana Number Fonns
Thaana Hangul Jamo Katakana Mathematical Operators
Devanagari Ethiopic Bopomofo Mathematical Alphanumeric Symbols
Bengali Cherokee Kanbun Braille Patterns
Gurmukhi Unified Canadian Shavian Optical Character Recognition
Aboriginal Syllabic
Gujarati Ogham Osmanya Byzantine Musical Symbols
Oriya Runic Cypriot Syllabary Musical Symbols
Tamil Tagalog Tai Xuan Jing Symbols Arrows
Telugu Hanunoo Yijing Hexagram Symbols Box Drawing
Kannada Buhid Aegean Numbers Geometric Shapes
FIGURE 2.22 Example alphabets In Unicode. Unicode version 4.0 has more than 160 "blocks," which is
their IMme for a collection of symbols. Each block is a multiple of 16. For example, Greek starts m 037000:' and
04<X\a.
Cyrillic at The first three colmnns show 48 blocks that correspond to human languages in roughly Uni 
code nwnerical order. The last colwnn has 16 blocks thm are multilingual and are not in order. A 16-bit encod 
ing, called UTF-16, is the default. A variable-length encoding, called lJfF-8, keeps theASCII subset as 8 bits and
uses 16---32 bits for theother characters. UTF-32 uses 32 bits per character.Th learn more, see www.unicode.org.
The MIPS instruction set has explicit instructions to load and store 16-bit
SUdl
quantities, called halfwords. Load half (1 h) loads a halfword from memory, placing it in
the rightmost 16 bits of a register. Store half (sh) takes a halhvord from the rightmost
16 bits of a register and writes it to memory. We copy a halhvord with the sequence
lh ItO , O(lsp) # Read halfword (16 bits) from source
sh ItO , O(lgp) # Write halfword (16 bits) to destination
Strings are a standard Java class with special built-in support and predefined
methods for concatell3tion, comparison, and conversion. Unlike C, Java includes
a word that gives the length of the string, similar to Java arrays.
Elaboration: MIPS software tries to keep the stack aligned to word addresses, allow 
ing the program to always use 1wand sw (which must be aligned) to access the stack.
This convention means that a char variable allocated on the stack occupies 4 bytes,
even though it needs less. However, a C string variable or an array of bytes will pack 4
bytes per word, and a Java string variable or array of shorts packs 2 halfwords per word.