258 Chapter 4 Assessing and Understanding Performance
where Time; is the execution time for the ith program of a total of n in the work 
load. Since it is the mean of execution times, a smaller mean indicates a smaller
average execution time and thus improved performance.
The arithmetic mean is proportional to execution time, assuming that the pro 
grams in the workload are each run an equal number of times. Is that the right
workload? If not, we can assign a weighting factor wi to each program to indicate
the frequency of the program in that workload. If, for example, 20% of the tasks in
the workload were program 1 and 80% of the tasks in the workload were program
weighted arithmetic mean
2, then the weighting factors would be 0.2 and 0.8. By summing the products of
An average of the execution
weighting factors and execution times, we can obtain a clear picture of the perfor 
time of a workload with weight 
mance of the workload. This sum is called the weighted arithmetic mean. One
ing factors designed to reflect
method of weighting programs is to choose weights so that the execution time of
the presence of the programs in
a workload; computed as the each benchmark is equal on the computer used as the base. The standard arith 
sum of the products of weight  metic mean is a special case of the weighted arithmetic mean where all weights are
ing factors and execution times.
equal. We explore the weighted mea n in more detail in Exercises 4.1 5 and 4.1 6.
Check
1. Suppose you are choosing between four different desktop computers: one is
Yourself an Apple Macintosh and the other three are PC-compatible computers that
use a Pentium 4, an AMD processor (using the same compiler as the Pen 
tium 4), and a Pentium 5 (which does not yet exist in 2004 but has the same
architecture as the Pentium 4 and uses the same compiler). \Vhich of the
following statements are true?
a. The fastest computer will be the one with the highest clock rate.
b. Since all PCs use the same Intel-compatible instruction set and execute
the sa me number of instructions for a program, the fastest PC will be
the one with the highest clock rate.
c. Since AMD uses different techniques than Intel to execute instructions,
they may have different CPIs. But, you can still tell which of the two
Pentium-based PCs is fastest by looking at the clock rate.
d. Only by looking at the results of benchmarks for tasks similar to your
workload can you get an accurate picture of likely performance.
2. Assume the following measurements of execution time were taken:
~I ====-;~":=:====
Computer A Computer B
==""":'":":":===