G-4 Glossary
that allows for a subsequent transfer of con  D flip-flop A flip-flop with one data input
trol to a new address in the program based that stores the value of that input signal in
on the outcome of the comparison. the internal memory when the clock edge
conflict miss Also called collision miss. A occurs.
cache miss that occurs in a set-associative or data hazard Also called pipeline data haz 
direct-mapped cache when multiple blocks ard. An occurrence in which a planned in 
compete for the same set and that are elim  struction cannot execute in the proper clock
inated in a fully associative cache of the cycle because data that is needed to execute
same Size. the instruction is not yet available.
constellation A cluster that uses an SMP as data parallelism Parallelism achieved by
the building block. having massive data.
context switch A changing of the internal data rate Performance measure of bytes
state of the processor to allow a different per unit time, such as GB/second.
process to use the processor that includes data segment The segment of a UNIX ob 
saving the state needed to return to the cur  ject or executable file that contains a binary
rently executing process. representation of the initialized data used
control The component of the processor by the program.
that commands the datapath, memory, and data transfer instruction A command that
I/O devices according to the instructions of moves data between memory and registers.
the program. datapath The component of the processor
control hazard Also called branch hazard. that performs arithmetic operations.
An occurrence in which the proper instruc  datapath element A functional unit used
tion cannot execute in the proper clock cy  to operate on or hold data within a proces 
cle because the instruction that was fetched sor. In the MIPS implementation the datap 
is not the one that is needed; that is, the flow ath elements include the instruction and
of instruction addresses is not what the data memories, the register file, the arith 
pipeline expected. metic logic unit (ALU), and adders.
control signal A signal used for multiplex  deasserted signal A signal that is (logically)
or selection or for directing the operation of false, or O.
a functional unit; contrasts with a data sig  decoder A logic block that has an II-bit in 
nal, which contains information that is op  put and 2/1 outputs where only one output
erated on by a functional unit. is asserted for each input combination.
correlating predictor A branch predictor defect A microscopic flaw in a wafer or in
that combines local behavior of a particular patterning steps that can result in the failure
branch and global information about the of the die containing that defect.
behavior of some recent number of execut  delayed branch A type of branch where the
ed branches. instruction immediately following the
CPUexecution time Also called CPUtime. branch is always executed, independent of
The actual time the CPU spends computing whether the branch condition is true or false.
for a specific task. desktop computer A computer designed
crossbar network A network that allows for use by an individual, usually incorporat 
any node to communicate with any other ing a graphics display, keyboard, and
node in one pass through the network. mouse.