G-l
Glossary
Glossary
absolute address A variable's or routine's Amdahl's law A rule stating that the per 
actual address in memory. formance enhancement possible with a giv 
abstraction A model that renders lower  en improvement is limited by the amount
level details of computer systems tempo  that the improved feature is used.
rarily invisible in order to facilitate design of antidependence Also called name depen 
sophisticated systems. dence. An ordering forced by the reuse of a
acronym A word constructed by taking the name, typically a register, rather then by a
initial letters of string of words. For exam  true dependence that carries a value be 
ple: RAM isan acronym for Random Access tween nvo instructions.
Memory, and CPU is an acronym for Cen  antifuse A structure in an integrated cir 
tral Processing Unit. cuit that when programmed makes a per 
active matrix display A liquid crystal dis  manent connection between nvo wires.
play using a transistor to control the trans  application binary interface (ABI) The
mission of light at each individual pixeL user portion of the instruction set plus
address translation Also called address the operating system interfaces used by
mapping. The process by which avirtual ad  application programmers. Defines a
dress is mapped to an address used to access standard for binary portability across
memory. computers.
address A value used to delineate the loca  architectural registers The instruction set
tion of a specific data element within a visible registers of a processor; for example,
memory array. in MIPS, these are the 32 integer and 16
addressing mode One of several address  floating-point registers.
ing regimes delimited by their varied use of arithmetic mean The average of the execu 
operands and/or addresses. tion times that is directly proportional to
advanced load In IA-64, a speculative load total execution time.
instruction with support to check for aliases assembler directive An operation that tells
that could invalidate the load. the assembler how to translate a program
aliasing A situation in which the same ob  but does not produce machine instructions;
ject is accessed by two addresses; can occur always begins with a period.
in virtual memorywhen there are two virtu  assembler A program that translates a
al addresses for the same physical page. symbolic version of instructions into the bi 
alignment restriction A requirement that nary versIOn.
data be aligned in memory on natural assembly language A symbolic language
boundaries that can be translated into binary.