7.6 Real Stuff: The Pentium P4 and the AMD Opteron Memory Hierarchies 549
the RAM cells in a multiported memory must be much larger than single-ported
cells. The alternative scheme is to break the cache into banks and allow multiple,
independent accesses, provided the accesses are to different banks. The technique is
similar to interleaved main memory (see Figure 7.11 on page 489).
To reduce the memory traffic in a multiprocessor configuration, Intel has other
versions of the P4 with much larger on-dlip caches in 2004. For example, the Intel
Pentium P4 Xeon comes with third-level cache chip of 1 MB and is intended for
011
dual-processor servers. A more radical example is the Intel Pentium P4 Extreme
Edition, which comes with 2 MB of L3 cache but no support for multiprocessing.
These two chips are much larger and more expensive. For example, in 2004 a Preci 
sion Workstation 360 with a 3.2 GHz P4 costs about $1900. Upgrading to the
Extreme Edition processor adds $500 to the price. The Dell Precision Workstation
450, which allows dual processors, costs about $2000 for a 3.2 GHz Xeon with 1MB
of L3 cache. Adding a second processor like that one adds $1500 to the price.
The sophisticated memory hierarchies of these chips and the large fraction of
the dies dedicated to caches and TLBs show the significant design effort expended
to try to close the gap between processor cycle times and memory latency. Future
advances in processor pipeline designs, together with the increased use of multi 
processing that presents its own problems in memory hierarchies, provide many
new challenges for designers.
Elaboration: Perhaps the largest difference between the AMD and Intel chips is the
use of a trace cache for the P4 instruction cache, while the AMD Opteron uses a more
traditional instruction cache.
Instead of organizing the instructions in a cache block sequentially to promote spa 
tial locality, a trace cache finds a dynamic sequence of instructions including taken
branches to load into a cache block. Thus, the cache blocks contain dynamic traces of
the executed instructions as determined by the CPU rather than static sequences of
instructions as determined by memory layout. It folds branch prediction (Chapter 6) into
the cache, so the branches must be validated along with the addresses in order to have
a valid fetch. In addition, the P4 caches the micro-operations (see Chapter 5) rather
than the IA-32 instructions as in the Opteron.
Clearly, trace caches have much more complicated address mapping mechanisms,
since the addresses are no longer aligned to power-of-two multiples of the word size.
Trace caches can improve utilization of cache blocks, however. For example, very
long blocks in conventional caches may be entered from a taken branch, and hence the
first portion of the block occupies space in the cache that might not be fetched. Simi 
larly, such blocks may be exited by taken branches, so the last portion of the block
might be wasted. Given that taken branches or jumps occur every 5-10 instructions,
effective block utilization is a real problem for processors like the Opteron, whose 64 
byte block would likely include 16-24 80x86 instructions. Trace caches store instruc 
tions only from the branch entry point to the exit of the trace, thereby avoiding such