Glossary G-3
cache with tags, making it more costly than cathode ray tube (CRT) display A display,
a simple prediction buffer. such as a television set, that displays an im 
bus In logic design , a collection of data age using an electron beam scanned across a
lines that is treated together as a single logi  screen.
cal signal; also, a shared collection oflines central processor unit (CPU) Also called
with multiple sources and uses. processor. The active part of the computer,
bus master A unit on the bus that can ini  which contains the datapath and control
tiate bus requests. and which adds numbers, tests numbers,
bus transaction A sequence of bus opera  signals I/O devices to activate, and so on.
tions that includes a request and may in  clock cycle Also called tick, clock tick,
clude a response, either ofwhich may carry clock period, clock, cycle. The time for one
data. A transaction is initiated by a single re  clock period, usually of the processor clock,
quest and maytake many individual bus op  which nms at a constant rate.
erations. clock cycles per instruction (CPI) Average
cache coherency Consistency in the value number ofclock cycles per instruction for a
ofdata benveen theversions in the caches of program or program fragm ent.
several processors. clock period The length of each clock cycle.
cachecoherent NUMACC-NUMA A non  clock skew The difference in absolute time
uniform memory access multiprocessor between the times when two state elements
that maintains coherence for all caches. see a clock edge.
cache memory A small, fast memory that clocking methodology The approach used
acts as a buffer for a slower, larger memory. to determine when data is valid and stable
cache miss A request for data from the relative to the clock.
cache that cannot be filled because the data cluster A set of computers connected over
is not present in the cache. a local area network (LAN) that function as
callee A procedure that executes a series of a single large multiprocessor.
stored instructions based on parameters combinational logic A logic system whose
provided by the caller and then returns con  blocks do not contain memory and hence
trol to the caller. compute the same output given the same
callee-saved register A register saved by input.
the routine making a procedure calL commit unit The unit in a dynamic or out 
caller The program that instigates a proce  of-order execution pipeline that decides
dure and provides the necessary parameter when it is safe to release the result of an op 
values. eration to programmer-visible registers and
caller-saved register A register saved by memory.
the routine being called. compiler A program that translates high 
capacity miss A cache miss that occurs be  level language statements into assembly
cause the cache, even with full associativity, language statements.
cannot contain all the block needed to satis  compulsory miss Also called cold start
fy the request. miss.A cache miss caused by the first access
carrier signal A continuous signal of a sin  to a block that has never been in the cache.
gle frequency capable of being modulated conditional branch An instruction that re 
by a second data-carrying signaL quires the comparison of two values and