4.6 Concluding Remarks 271
We will use this equation and its constituent factors many times. Remember,
though, that individually the factors do not determine performance: Only the
product, which equals execution time, is a reliable measure of performance.
BIG
Execution time is the only valid and unimpeachable measure of perfor 
The
mance. Many other metrics have been proposed and found wanting.
Picture
Sometimes these metrics are flawed from the start by not reflecting exe 
cution time; other times a metric valid in a limited context is extended
and used beyond that context or without the additional clarification
needed to make it valid.
Similarly, any measure that summarizes performance should reflect
execution time. Weighted arithmetic means summarize performance
while tracking execution time. Through the use of weights, a weighted
arithmetic mean can adjust for different running times, balancing the
contribution of each benchmark to the summary.
Of course, simply knowing this equation is not enough to guide the design or
evaluation of a computer. We must understand how the different aspects of a
design affect each of these key parameters. This insight involves a wide variety of
issues, from the effectiveness of the compiler, to the effects of instruction set
design on instruction count, to the impact of pipelining and memory systems on
CPl , to the interaction between the technology and organization that determine
the clock rate. The art of computer design and evaluation lies not in plugging
numbers into a performance equation, but in accurately determining how alter 
natives will affect performance and cost.
Most computer users care about both cost and performance. \-Vhile under 
standing the relationship among aspects of a design and its performance is chal 
lenging, determining the cost of various design features is often a more difficult
problem. The cost of a computer is affected not only by the cost of the compo 
nents, but by the costs of labor to assemble the computer, of research and develop 
ment overhead, of sales and marketing, and of the profit margin. Finally, because
of the rapid change in implementation technologies, the most cost-effective
choice today is often suboptimal in six months or a year.
Computer designs will always be measured by cost and performance, as well as
other important factors such as power, reliability, cost of ownership, and scalabil 
ity. Although this chapter has focused on perfo rmance, the best designs will strike
the appropriate balance for a given market among all these factors.