1.5 Fallacies and Pitfalls 33
A key factor in determining the cost of an integrated circuit is volume. \Vhich of Check
the following are reasons why a chip made in high volume should cost less? Yourself
1. With high volumes, the manufacturing process can be tuned to a particular
design, increasing the yield.
2. It is less work to design a high-volume part than a low-volume part.
3. The masks used to make the chip are expensive, so the cost per chip is lower
for higher volumes.
4. Engineering development costs are high and largely independent of vol 
ume; thus, the development cost per die is lower with high-volume parts.
5. High-volume parts usually have smaller die sizes than low-volume parts
and therefore have higher yield per wafer.
Science must begin with
myths, and the criticism of
Fallacies and Pitfalls
myths.
Sir Karl Popper, The
Philosophy ofScience, 1957
The purpose of a section on fallacies and pitfalls, which will be found in every
chapter, is to explain some commonly held misconceptions that you might
encounter. We call such misbeliefs fallacies. When discussing a fallacy, we try to
give a counterexample. We also discuss pitfalls, or easily made mistakes. Often pit 
falls are generalizations of principles that are true in a limited context. The pur 
pose of these sections is to help you avoid making these mistakes in the machines
you may design or use.
Fallacy: Computers have been built in the same, old-fashioned way for far too
long, and this antiquated model ofcomputation is running Ollt ofsteam.
For an antiquated model of computation, it surely is improving quickly.
Figure 1.1 7 plots the top performance per year of workstations between 1987 and
2003. (Chapter 4 explains the proper way to measure performance.) The graph
shows a line indicating an improvement of 1.54 per year, or doubling performance
approximately every 18 months. In contrast to the statement above, computers are
improving in performance faster today than at any time in their history, with over
a thousandfold improvement between 1987 and 2003!
Pitfall: Ignoring the inexorable progress of hardware when planning a new
machine.
Suppose you plan to introduce a machine in three years, and you claim the
machine will be a terrific seller because it's three times as fast as anything available
today. Unfortunately, the machine will probably sell poorly because the average