1.3 Under the Covers 15
The final advantage is that programming languages allow programs to be inde 
pendent of the computer on which they were developed, since compilers and
assemblers can translate high-level language programs to the binary instructions
of any machine. These three advantages are so strong that today little program 
ming is done in assembly language.
Under the Covers
Now that we have looked below your program to uncover the underlying software,
let's open the covers of the computer to learn about the underlying hardware. The
underlying hardware in any computer performs the same basic functions: input 
ting data, outputting data, processing data, and storing data. How these functions
are performed is the primary topic of this book, and subsequent chapters deal
with different parts of these four tasks. When we come to an important point in
this book, a point so important that we hope you will remember it forever, we
emphasize it by identifying it as a "Big Picture" item. We have about a dozen Big
Pictures in this book, with the first being the five components of a computer that
perform the tasks of inputting, outputting, processing, and storing data.
BIG
The five classic components of a computer are input, output, memory,
The
datapath, and control, with the last two sometimes combined and called
Picture
the processor. Figure 1.5 shows the standard organization of a computer.
This organization is independent of hardware technology: You can place
every piece of every computer, past and present, into one of these five cat 
egories. To help you keep all this in perspective, the five components of a
computer are shown on the front page of the following chapters, with the
portion of interest to that chapter highlighted.
Figure 1.6 shows a typical desktop computer with keyboard, mouse, screen, input device A mechanism
through which the computer is
and a box containing even more hardware. What is not visible in the photograph
fed information, such as the
is a network that connects the computer to other computers. This photograph
keyboard or mouse.
reveals two of the key components of computers: input devices, such as the key 
board and m ouse, and o utput devices, such as the screen. As the names suggest, output device A mechanism
that conveys the result ofa com 
input feeds the computer, and output is the result of computation sent to the user.
putation to a user or another
Some devices, such as networks and disks, provide both input and output to the
computer.
computer.