8.9 Fallacies and Pitfalls 607
or are unattainable because of other system limitations. For example, in quoting
bus performance, the peak transfer rate is sometimes specified using a memory
system that is impossible to build. For networked systems, the software overhead
of initiating communication is ignored.
The 32-bit, 33 MHz PCI bus has a peak bandwidth of about 133 MB/sec. In
practice, even for long transfers, it is difficult to sustain more than about 80
MB/sec for realistic memory systems. As mentioned above, users of wireless net 
works typically achieve only about a third of the peak bandwidth.
Amdahl's law also reminds us that the throughput of an I/O system will be lim 
ited by the lowest-performance component in the I/O path.
Fallacy: Magnetic disk storage is on its last legs and will be replaced shortly.
This is both a fallacy and a pitfall. Such claims have been made constantly for the
past 20 years, though the string of failed alternatives in recent years seems to have
reduced the level of claims for the death of magnetic storage. Among the unsuc 
cessful contenders are magnetic bubble memories, optical storage, and holo 
graphic storage. None of these systems has matched the combination of
characteristics that favor magnetic disks: high reliability, nonvolatility, low cost,
reasonable access time, and rapid improvement. Magnetic storage technology
continues to improve at the same-or faster- pace that it has sustained over the
past 25 yea rs.
Pitfall: Using magnetic tapes to back lip disks.
Once again, this is both a fallacy and a pitfall.
Magnetic tapes have been part of computer systems as long as disks because
they use similar technology as disks, and hence historically have followed the same
density improvements. The historic cost-performance difference between disks
and tapes is based on a sealed, rotating disk having lower access time than sequen 
tial tape access but removable spools of magnetic tape mean many tapes can be
used per reader and they can be very long and so have high capacity. Hence, in the
past a single magnetic tape could hold the contents of many disks, and since it was
10 to 100 times cheaper per gigabyte than disks, it was a useful backup medium.
The claim was that magnetic tapes must track disks since innovations in disks
must help tapes. This claim was important because tapes were a small market and
could not afford a separate large research and development effort. One reason the
market is small is that desktop owners generally do not back up disks onto tape,
and so while desktops are by far the largest market for disks, desktops are a small
market for tapes.
Alas, the larger market has led disks to improve much more quickly than tapes.
Starting in 2000 to 2002, the largest popular disk was larger than the largest popu 
lar tape. In that same time frame, the price per gigabyte of ATA disks dropped
below that of tapes. Tape apologists now claim that tapes have compatibility
requirements that are not imposed on disks; tape readers must read or write the
current and previous generation of tapes, and must read the last four generations