4.4 Real Stuff: Two SPEC Benchmarks and the Performance of Recent Intel Processors 25.
\Vhich of the following statements is true?
a. A is faster than B for program 1.
b. A is faster than B for program 2.
c. A is faster than B for a workload with equal numbers of executions of pro 
gram I and 2.
d. A is faster than B for a workload with twice as many executions of program
I as of program 2.
Real Stuff: Two SPEC Benchmarks
and the Performance of Recent
Intel Processors
SPEC (System Performance Evaluation Corporation) is an effort fund ed and
supported by a number of computer vendors to create standard sets of bench 
marks for modern computer systems. It began in 1989 focusing on benchmark 
ing workstations and servers using CPU-intensive benchmarks. (A more
detailed history is contained in Section 4.7.) Today, SPEC offers a dozen differ 
ent benchmark sets designed to test a wide variety of computing environments
using real applications and strictly specified execution rules and reporting
requirements. The SPEC benchmark sets include benchmarks for CPU perfor 
mance, graphics, high -performance computing, object-oriented computing,
lava applications, client-server models, mail systems, file systems, and \Veb serv 
ers. In this section, we examine the performance of a variety of Dell computer
systems that use Pentium III and Pentium 4 processors using a CPU perfor 
mance benchmark and a Web-oriented system benchmark.
Performance with SPEC CPU Benchmarks
The latest release of the SPEC CPU benchmarks is the SPEC CPU2000 suite, system performance evalua 
which consists of 12 integer and 14 floating-point programs, as shown in Figure tion cooperative (SPEC)
benchmark A set ofstandard
4.5. The SPEC CPU benchmarks are intended to measure CPU performance,
CPU-intensive, integer and
although wall clock time is the reported measurement. Separate summaries are
floating point benchmarks
reported for the integer and floating-point benchmark sets. The execution time
based on real programs.
measurements are first normalized by dividing the execution time on a Sun Ultra
5_ 10 with a 300 MHz processor by the execution time on the measu red computer;
this normalization yields a measure, called the SPEC ratio, which has the advan 
tage that bigger numeric results indicate faster performance (i.e., SPEC ratio is the
inverse of execution time). A CINT2000 or C FP2000 summary measurement is
obtained by taking the geometric mean of the SPEC ratios. (See the In More
Depth section on the CD for a discussion of trade-offs in using geometric mean.)