22 Chapter 1 Computer Abstractions and Technology
Processor M
•
m
o,
y
Disk
Processor and USB
interface interlaces
Graphics
110 bus
slots
DlMM (dual inline memory
module) A small board that FIGURE 1.10 Close-up of PC motherboard. This board uses the Intel Pentiwn 4 processor,which is
located on the left-upper quadrant of the board.It is covered by a set of metal fins, which look like a radia 
contains DRAM chips on both
tor. This structure is the hear sink, used to help cool the chip. The main memory is contained on one or
sides. SIMMs have DRAMs on
more small boards that are perpendicuiar to the motherboard near the middle. The DRAM chips are
only one side. Both DIMMs and
mounted on these bo.uds (caUed DIMMs,for dual inline memory moouies) and then plugged into the con 
SIMMs are meant to be plugged
nectors. Much of the rest of the bo.ud comprises connectors for external If0 devices:audio/MIDI and par 
into memory slots, usually on a
alleVserial at the right edge, two PCI card slots near the boltom, and an ATA connector used for attaching
motherboard.
hard disks.
instruction set architecture
Also called architecture. An
name: the instruction set architecture, or simply architecture, of a machine.
abstract interface between the
The instruction set architecnlfe includes anything programmers need to know to
hardware and the lowest level
make a binary machine language program work correctly, including instructions,
software of a machine that
I/O devices, and so on. Typically the operating system will encapsulate the details
encompasses all the information
necessary to write a machine of doing I/O, allocating memory, and other low-level system functions, so that
language program that will run application programmers do not need to worry about such details. The combina 
correctly, including instruc 
tion of the basic instruction set and the operating system interface provided for
tions, registers, memory access,
application programmers is called the application binary interface (AB!).
I/O, and so all.
An instruction set architecture allows computer designers to talk about func 
application binary interface tions independently from the hardware that performs them. For example, we can
(ABI) The user portion of the
talk about the functions of a digital clock (keeping time, displaying the time, set 
instruction set plus the operat 
ting the alarm) independently from the clock hardware (quartz crystal, LED dis 
ing system interfaces used by
plays, plastic buttons). Computer designers distinguish architecture from an
application programmers.
implementation of an architecture along the same lines: an implementation is
Defines a standard for binary
hardwa re that obeys the architecnlfe abstraction. These ideas bring us to another
portability across computers.
Big Picture.
implementation Hardware
that obeys the architecture
abstraction.