54 Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
Memory Operands
Programming languages have simple va riables that contain single data elements as
in these examples, but they also have more complex data structures-arrays and
structures. These complex data structures can contain many more data elements
than there are registers in a computer. How can a computer represent and access
such large structures?
Recall the five components of a computer introduced in Chapter 1 and
depicted on page 47. The processor can keep only a small amount of data in regis 
ters, but computer memory contains millions of data elements. Hence, data struc 
tures (arrays and structures) are kept in memory.
As explained above, arithmetic operations occur only on registers in MIPS
instructions; thus, MIPS must include instructions that transfer data between
data transfer instruction A memory and registers. Such instructions are called data transfer instructions. To
command that moves data
access a word in memory, the instruction must supply the memory address.
between memory and registers.
Memory is just a large, single-dimensional array, with the address acting as the
address Avalue used to delin  index to that array, starting at O. For example, in Figure 2.2, the address of the
eate the location ofa specific third data element is 2, and the value ofMemory(2] is 10.
data element within a memory The data transfer instruction that copies data from memory to a register is tra 
array.
ditionally called load. The format of the load instruction is the name of the opera 
tion followed by the register to be loaded, then a constant and register used to
access memory. The sum of the constant portion of the instruction and the con 
tents of the second register forms the memory address. The acnlal MIPS name for
this instruction is 1w, standing for load word.
•
3 100
2 10
1 101
0 1
Address Data
Processor Memory
FIGURE 2.2 Memory addresses and contents of memory at those Ioc:atlons. This is a sim 
plification of the MIPS addressing; Figure 2.3 shows the actual MIPS addressing for sequential word
addresses in memory.