closer to those popular on the Internet news New York Times front page to the Google News
services. Together they overcame the disad  Web site on the same day.
vantage that most major media organizations The widespread impact of these technolo 
endo rsed his opponent. gies reminds us that computer engineers have
Google News is another example of nontra  responsibilities to their communities. We
ditional access to news that goes beyond the must be aware of societal values concerning
mass media of one country. It searches inter  privacy, security, free speech, and so on to
national news services for topics, and then ensure that new technological innovations
summarizes and displays them by popularity. enhance those values rather than inadvertently
Rather than leaving the decision o f what arti  compromising them.
cles should be on the front page to local news 
paper editors, the worldwide media decides. To learn more see these references on
II
In addition, by providing links to stories from the library
many countries, the reader gets an interna 
D "Seriously wired:' The Economist, April 17,2003.
tional perspective rather than a local one. It
D OhMyNews, www.ohmynews.com
also is updated many times a day unlike a daily
D Coogle News, www.news.google.colTl
newspaper. The figure below compares the
JUdge Rules Out a Death Penalty lor 9/11 Top Stories
Suspect More than 1000 rally behind Schwarzenegger
Rebuke for Justice Dept. AP - 5 minutes ago
Poll Shows Drop In COnndence on Bush Maria Shriver defends husband CNN
Skillin Handling Crises Can accusations hurt Arnold's campaign?
Country on Wrong Track, SaY5 Solid KESQ
Major~y and 1252 related
Revised Admission lor High Schools Bush:Hussein 'A Danger to the World' ABC
City SaY5 Students Will Get First Preference news - 5 hours ago
No illicit Arms Found In Iraq, U.S. Inspector Bush Stands By Decision Voice of America
Tells Congress Hunt for weapons yields no evidence The
U.S. Practice How to Down Hijacked Jets Canberra Times
Coetzee, Wr1ter 01 Apartheid as Bleak Mirror, and 598 related
Wins Nobel
sexual Accusations Lead to an Apology World Stories
by SChwarzenegger Defiant UN chief announces rival blueprint for
Interim Chlel Accepts Stock Exchange Iraq
Shill The Times (UK) - 2 hours ago
Yankees Even with Twins France, Russia Assail US Draft on Iraq
Agency Warns of Fake Drugs Reuters
Limbaugh Fallback Position and 782 related
New York Times versus Google News on october 3, 2003 at 6 PM PT. The newsp.1per from page headlines must balance
big stories with national news, local news, and sports. Google News has many stories per headline from around the world, with links the reader
can follow. Google stories vary bytime of d.1yand hence are more recent.