1.1 Introduction 5
Classes of Computing Applications and Their
Characteristics
Although a common set of hardware technologies (discussed in Sections 1.3 and
1.4) is used in computers ranging from smart home appliances to cell phones to
the largest supercomputers, these different applications have different design
requirements and employ the core hardware technologies in different ways.
Broadly speaking, computers are used in three different classes of applications.
Desktop computers are possibly the best-known form of computing and are desktop computer A com 
characterized by the personal computer, which most readers of this book have puter designed for use by an
individual, usually incorporat 
probably used extensively. Desktop computers emphasize delivering good perfor 
inga graphics display, keyboard,
mance to a single user at low cost and usually are used to execute third-party soft 
and mouse.
ware, also called shrink-wrap software. Desktop computing is one of the largest
markets for computers, and the evolution of many computing technologies is
driven by this class of computing, which is only about 30 years old!
Servers are the modern form of what was once mainframes, minicomputers,
Server A computer used for
and supercomputers, and are usually accessed only via a network. Servers are ori  running larger programs for
ented to carrying large workloads, which may consist of either single complex multiple users often simulta 
neously and typically accessed
applications, usually a scientific or engineering application, or handling many
only via a network.
small jobs, such as would occur in building a large Web server. These applications
are often based on software from another source (such as a database or simulation
system), but are often modified or customized for a particular function. Servers
are built from the same basic technology as desktop computers, but provide for
greater expa ndability of both computing and input/output capacity. As we will see
in the Chapter 4, the performance of a server can be measured in several different
ways, depending on the application of interest. In general, servers also place a
greater emphasis on dependability, since a crash is usually more costly than it
would be on a single-user desktop computer.
Servers span the widest range in cost and capability. At the low end, a server supercomputer A class of
computers with the highest per 
may be little more than a desktop machine without a screen or keyboard and with
formance and cost; they are
a cost of a thousand dollars. These low-end servers are typically used for file stor 
configured as servers and typi 
age, small business applications, or simple web serving. At the other extreme are
cally cost millions ofdollars.
supercomputers, which at the present consist of hundreds to thousands of pro 
terabyte Originally
cessors, and usually gigabytes to terabytes of memory and terabytes to petabytes
40
1,099,511,627,776 (2 bytes,
)
of storage, and cost millions to hundreds of millions of dollars. Supercomputers
although some communications
are usually used for high-end scientific and engineering calculations, such as
and secondary storage systems
weather forecasting, oil exploration, protein structure determination, and other
have redefined it to mean
large-scale problems. Although such supercomputers represent the peak of com  1,000,000,000,000 (1012 bytes.
)
puting capability, they are a relatively small fraction of the servers and a relatively
embedded computer A com 
small fraction of the overall computer market in terms of total revenue.
puter inside another device used
Embedded computers are the largest class of computers and span the widest
for rulming one predetermined
range of applications and performance. Embedded computers include the micro 
application or collection ofsoft 
processors found in your washing machine and car, the computers in a cell phone ware.