8.4 Buses and other Connections between Processors, Memory, and i/ O Devlc:es 581
Buses and Other Connections between
Processors, Memory, and I/O Devices
In a computer system, the various subsystems must have interfaces to one another.
For example, the memory and processor need to communicate, as do the proces 
sor and the I/O devices. For many years, this has been done with a bus. A bus is a
shared communication link, which uses one set of wires to connect multiple sub 
systems. The two major advantages of the bus organization are versatility and low
cost. By defining a single connection scheme, new devices ca n easily be added, and
peripherals can even be moved between computer systems that use the same kind
of bus. Furthermore, buses are cost-effective because a single set of wires is shared
in multiple ways.
The major disadvantage of a bus is that it creates a communication bottleneck,
possibly limiting the maximum I/O throughput. When I/O must pass through a
single bus, the bandwidth of that bus limits the maximum I/O throughput.
Designing a bus system capable of meeting the demands of the processor as well as
connecting large numbers of I/O devices to the machine presents a major chal 
lenge.
One reason bus design is so difficult is that the maximum bus speed is largely
limited by physical factors: the length of the bus and the number of devices.
These physical limits prevent us from running the bus arbitrarily fast. In addition,
the need to support a range of devices with widely varying latencies and data
transfer rates also makes bus design challenging.
As it becomes difficult to run many parallel wires at high speed due to clock
skew and reflection, the industry is in transition from parallel shared buses to
high-speed serial point-to-point interconnections with switches. Thus, such net 
works are gradually replacing buses in our systems.
As a result of this transition, this section has been revised in this edition to
emphasize the general problem of connecting I/O devices, processors, and mem 
ory rather than focus exclusively on buses.
Bus Basics
Classically, a bus generally contains a set of control lines and a set of data lines.
The control lines are used to signal requests and acknowledgments, and to indi 
cate what type of information is on the data lines. The data lines of the bus carry
information between the source and the destination. This information may con 
sist of data, complex commands, or addresses. For example, if a disk wa nts to
write some data into memory from a disk sector, the data lines will be used to
indicate the address in memory in which to place the data as well as to carry the