138
Chapter 2 Instructions: Language of the Computer
Source/ destination operand type Second source operand
Register Register
Register Immediate
Register Memory
Memory Register
Memory Immediate
FIGURE 2.41 Instruction types for the arithmetic, logical, and data transfer Instructions.
The IA-J2 allows the combinations shown.The only restriction is the absence ofa memory-memory mode.
Immediates may be 8, 16, or 32 bits in length; a register is anyone of the 14 major registers in Figure 2.40
(not EIP or EFLAGS).
prefixing an E to their name to indicate the 32-bit version. We'll refer to them
generically as GPRs (general-purpose registers). The 80386 contains only eight
GPRs. This means MIPS programs can use four times as many.
The arithmetic, logical, and data transfer instructions are two-operand instruc 
tions that allow the combinations shown in Figure 2.41. There are two important
differences here. The IA-32 arithmetic and logical instructions must have one
operand act as both a source and a destination; MIPS allows separate registers for
source and destination. This restriction puts more pressure on the limited regis 
ters, since one source register must be modified. The second important difference
is that one of the operands can be in memory. Thus virtually any instruction may
have one operand in memory, unlike MIPS and PowerPC.
The seven data memory-addressing modes, described in detail below, offer two
sizes of addresses within the instruction. These so-called displacements ca n be 8
bits or 32 bits.
Although a memory operand can use any addressing mode, there are restric 
tions on which registers can be used in a mode. Figure 2.42 shows the IA-32
addressing modes and which GPRs cannot be used with that mode, plus how you
would get the same effect using MIPS instructions.
IA·32 Integer Operations
The 8086 provides support for both 8-bit (byte) and 16-bit (word) data types. The
80386 adds 32-bit addresses and data (dol/ble words) in the IA-32. The data type
distinctions apply to register operations as well as memory accesses. Almost every
operation works on both 8-bit data and on one longer data size. That size is deter 
mined by the mode and is either 16 bits or 32 bits.
Clea rly some programs want to operate on data of all three sizes, so the 80386
architects provide a convenient way to specify each version without expanding
code size significantly. They decided that either 16-bit or 32-bit data dominates