BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES

 

of CO2 from carbamino-haemoglobin takes place, i.e., CO2 which is bound
to haemoglobin from the tissues is delivered at the alveoli. RBCs contain
a very high concentration of the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase and minute
quantities of the same is present in the plasma too. This enzyme facilitates
the following reaction in both directions.

 

At the tissue site where partial pressure of CO2 is high due to
catabolism, CO2 diffuses into blood (RBCs and plasma) and forms HCO;
and H’“. At the alveolar site where pCO2 is low, the reaction proceeds in
the opposite direction leading to the formation of CO2 and H20. Thus,
CO2 trapped as bicarbonate at the tissue level and transported to the
alveoli is released out as CO2 (Figure 17 .4). Every 100 ml of deoxygenated
blood delivers approximately 4 ml of CO2 to the alveoli.

17.5 REGULATION OF RESPIRATION

Human beings have a signiﬁcant ability to maintain and moderate the
respiratory rhythm to suit the demands of the body tissues. This is done
by the neural system. A specialised centre present in the medulla region
of the brain called respiratory rhythm centre is primarily responsible for
this regulation. Another centre present in the pons region of the brain
called pneumotaxic centre can moderate the functions of the respiratory
rhythm centre. Neural signal from this centre can reduce the duration of
inspiration and thereby alter the respiratory rate. A chemosensitive area
is situated adjacent to the rhythm centre which is highly sensitive to CO2
and hydrogen ions. Increase in these substances can activate this centre,
which in turn can signal the rhythm centre to make necessary adjustments
in the respiratory process by which these substances can be eliminated.
Receptors associated with aortic arch and carotid artery also can recognise
changes in CO2 and H’“ concentration and send necessary signals to the
rhythm centre for remedial actions. The role of oxygen in the regulation of
respiratory rhythm is quite insigniﬁcant.

17.6 DISORDERS 0F RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

Asthma is a difﬁculty in breathing causing wheezing due to inﬂammation
of bronchi and bronchioles.

Emphysema is a chronic disorder in which alveolar walls are damaged
due to which respiratory surface is decreased. One of the major causes of
this is cigarette smoking.