STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION

produce 6-8 eggs. The animal is either mated with an elite bull or
artiﬁcially inseminated. The fertilised eggs at 8—32 cells stages, are
recovered non-surgically and transferred to surrogate mothers. The genetic
mother is available for another round of super ovulation. This technology
has been demonstrated for cattle, sheep, rabbits, buffaloes, mares, etc.
High milk-yielding breeds of females and high quality (lean meat with
less lipid) meat-yielding bulls have been bred successfully to increase
herd size in a short time.

9. 1 .3 Bee-keeping

Bee-keeping or apiculture is the maintenance of hives of honeybees for
the production of honey. It has been an age-old cottage industry. Honey
is a food of high nutritive value and also ﬁnds use in the indigenous
systems of medicine. Honeybee also produces beeswax, which ﬁnds many
uses in industry, such as in the preparation of cosmetics and polishes of
various kinds. The increased demand of honey has led to large-scale bee-
keeping practices; it has become an established income generating
industry, whether practiced on a small or on a large scale.

Bee-keeping can be practiced in any area where there are sufﬁcient
bee pastures of some wild shrubs, fruit orchards and cultivated crops.
There are several species of honeybees which can be reared. Of these, the
most common species is Apis indica. Beehives can be kept in one’s
courtyard, on the verandah of the house or even on the roof. Bee-keeping
is not labour-intensive.

Bee-keeping though relatively easy does require some specialised
knowledge and there are several organisations that teach bee-keeping.
The following points are important for successful bee-keeping:

(i) Knowledge of the nature and habits of bees,
(ii) Selection of suitable location for keeping the beehives,
(iii) Catching and hian of swarms (group of bees),
(iv) Management of beehives during different seasons, and
(v) Handling and collection of honey and of beeswax Bees are the pollinators
of many of our crop species (see chapter 2) such as sunﬂower, Brassica,
apple and pear. Keeping beehives in crop ﬁelds during ﬂowering period
increases pollination efﬁciency and improves the yield—beneﬁcial both
from the point of view of crop yield and honey yield.

9. 1.4 Fisheries

Fishery is an industry devoted to the catching, processing or selling of ﬁsh,
shellﬁsh or other aquatic animals. A large number of our population is
dependent on ﬁsh, ﬁsh products and other aquatic animals such as prawn,
crab, lobster, edible oyster, etc., for food. Some of the freshwater ﬁshes which
are very common include Catla, Rohu and common carp. Some of the marine
fishes that are eaten include — Hilsa, Sardines, Mackerel and Pomfrets.
Find out what ﬁshes are commonly eaten in your area.

2019—2020