F2 generation

Figure 5.3 Diagrammatic representation

72

Parental

F1 generation

 

BIOLOGY

Based on these observations,
Mendel proposed that something
was being stably passed down,
unchanged, from parent to offspring
through the gametes, over
successive generations. He called
these things as ‘factors’. Now we call
them as genes. Genes, therefore, are
the units of inheritance. They
contain the information that is
required to express a particular trait
in an organism. Genes which code
for a pair of contrasting traits are
known as alleles, i.e., they are
slightly different forms of the same
gene.

If we use alphabetical symbols
for each gene, then the capital letter
is used for the trait expressed at the
F1 stage and the small alphabet for
the other trait. For example, in case
of the character of height, T is used
for the Tall trait and t for the ‘dwarf’,
and T and t are alleles of each other.
Hence, in plants the pair of alleles
for height would be TT, Tt or tt.
Mendel also proposed that in a true

of monohybrid cross breeding, tall or dwarf pea variety

the allelic pair of genes for height are

identical or homozygous, TT and tt, respectively. TT and tt are called

the genotype of the plant while the descriptive terms tall and dwarf are

the phenotype. What then would be the phenotype of a plant that had a
genotype Tt?

As Mendel found the phenotype of the F1 heterozygote Tt to be exactly
like the TT parent in appearance, he proposed that in a pair of dissimilar
factors, one dominates the other (as in the F1) and hence is called the
dominant factor while the other factor is recessive . In this case T (for
tallness) is dominant over t (for dwarfness), that is recessive. He observed
identical behaviour for all the other characters / trait-pairs that he studied.

It is convenient (and logical) to use the capital and lower case of an
alphabetical symbol to remember this concept of dominance and
recessiveness. (Do not use T for tall and d for dwarf because you will
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to remember whether T and d are alleles of the same
gene / character or not). Alleles can be similar as in the case of homozygotes
TT and tt or can be dissimilar as in the case of the heterozygote Tt. Since

  
 

Dwarf

2019—2020