36

 

BIOLOGY

radical and root cap enclosed in an undifferentiated sheath called
coleorrhiza. The portion of the embryonal axis above the level of
attachment of scutellum is the epicotyl. Epicotyl has a shoot apex and a
few leaf primordia enclosed in a hollow foliar structure, the coleoptile.

Soak a few seeds in water (say of wheat, maize, peas, chickpeas,
ground nut) overnight. Then split the seeds and observe the various
parts of the embryo and the seed.

2.4.3 Seed

In angiosperrns, the seed is the ﬁnal product of sexual reproduction. It is
often described as a fertilised ovule. Seeds are formed inside fruits. A
seed typically consists of seed coat(s), cotyledon(s) and an embryo axis.
The cotyledons (Figure 2.15a) of the embryo are simple structures,
generally thick and swollen due to storage of food reserves (as in legumes).
Mature seeds may be non-albuminous or ex-albuminous. Non-
albuminous seeds have no residual endosperm as it is completely
consumed during embryo development (e.g., pea, groundnut).
Albuminous seeds retain a part of endosperrn as it is not completely used
up during embryo development (e. g., wheat, maize, barley, castor).
Occasionally, in some seeds such as black pepper and beet, remnants of
nucellus are also persistent. This residual, persistent nucellus is the
perisperm.

Integuments of ovules harden as tough protective seed coats
(Figure 2.15a). The micropyle remains as a small pore in the seed coat.
This facilitates entry of oxygen and water into the seed during germination.
As the seed matures, its water content is reduced and seeds become
relatively dry (10- 15 per cent moisture by mass). The general metabolic
activity of the embryo slows down. The embryo may enter a state of
inactivity called dormancy, or if favourable conditions are available
(adequate moisture, oxygen and suitable temperature), they germinate.

As ovules mature into seeds, the ovary develops into a fruit, i.e., the
transformation of ovules into seeds and ovary into fruit proceeds
simultaneously. The wall of the ovary develops into the wall of fruit called
pericarp. The fruits may be ﬂeshy as in guava, orange, mango, etc., or
may be dry, as in groundnut, and mustard, etc. Many fruits have evolved
mechanisms for dispersal of seeds. Recall the classiﬁcation of fruits and
their dispersal mechanisms that you have studied in an earlier class. Is
there any relationship between number of ovules in an ovary and the
number of seeds present in a fruit?

In most plants, by the time the fruit develops from the ovary, other
ﬂoral parts degenerate and fall off. However, in a few species such as apple,
strawberry, cashew, etc., the thalamus also contributes to fruit formation.
Such fruits are called false fruits (Figure 2.15b). Most fruits however
develop only from the ovary and are called true fruits. Although in most
of the species, fruits are the results of fertilisation, there are a few species

2019-2020