MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

broader scale. They can study all the genes in a genome, for example, all
the transcripts in a particular tissue or organ or tumor, or how tens of
thousands of genes and proteins work together in interconnected networks
to orchestrate the chemistry of life.

6.10 DNA FINGERPRINTING

As stated in the preceding section, 99.9 per cent of base sequence among
humans is the same. Assuming human genome as 3 X 109 bp, in how
many base sequences would there be differences? It is these differences
in sequence of DNA which make every individual unique in their
phenotypic appearance. If one aims to find out genetic differences
between two individuals or among individuals of a population,
sequencing the DNA every time would be a daunting and expensive
task. Imagine trying to compare two sets of 3 X 106 base pairs. DNA
fingerprinting is a very quick way to compare the DNA sequences of any
two individuals.

DNA fingerprinting involves identifying differences in some specific
regions in DNA sequence called as repetitive DNA, because in these
sequences, a small stretch of DNA is repeated many times. These repetitive
DNA are separated from bulk genomic DNA as different peaks during
density gradient centrifugation. The bulk DNA forms a major peak and
the other small peaks are referred to as satellite DNA. Depending on
base composition (A : T rich or G:C rich), length of segment, and number
of repetitive units, the satellite DNA is classified into many categories,
such as micro-satellites, mini-satellites etc. These sequences normally
do not code for any proteins, but they form a large portion of human
genome. These sequence show high degree of polymorphism and form
the basis of DNA fingerprinting. Since DNA from every tissue (such as
blood, hair-follicle, skin, bone, saliva, sperm etc.), from an individual
show the same degree of polymorphism, they become very useful
identiﬁcation tool in forensic applications. Further, as the polymorphisms
are inheritable from parents to children, DNA fingerprinting is the basis
of paternity testing, in case of disputes.

As polymorphism in DNA sequence is the basis of genetic mapping
of human genome as well as of DNA ﬁngerprinting, it is essential that we
understand what DNA polymorphism means in simple terms.
Polymorphism (variation at genetic level) arises due to mutations. (Recall
different kind of mutations and their effects that you have already
studied in Chapter 5, and in the preceding sections in this chapter.)
New mutations may arise in an individual either in somatic cells or in
the germ cells (cells that generate gametes in sexually reproducing
organisms). If a germ cell mutation does not seriously impair individual’s
ability to have offspring who can transmit the mutation, it can spread to

2019-2020