ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

are available for marine plants living at different depths of the ocean. Among
the red, green and brown algae that inhabit the sea, which is likely to
be found in the deepest waters? Why?

Soil: The nature and properties of soil in different places vary; it is
dependent on the climate, the weathering process, whether soil is
transported or sedimentary and how soil development occurred. Various
characteristics of the soil such as soil composition, grain size and
aggregation determine the percolation and water holding capacity of the
soils. These characteristics along with parameters such as pH, mineral
composition and topography determine to a large extent the vegetation in
any area. This in turn dictates the type of animals that can be supported.
Similarly, in the aquatic environment, the sediment-characteristics often
determine the type of benthic animals that can thrive there.

13. 1.2 Responses to Abiotic Factors

Having realised that the abiotic conditions of many habitats may vary
drastically in time, we now ask—how do the organisms living in such
habitats cope or manage with stressﬁil conditions? But before attempting
to answer this question, we should perhaps ask ﬁrst why a highly variable
external environment should bother organisms after all. One would expect
that during the course of millions of years of their existence, many species
would have evolved a relatively constant internal (within the body)
environment that permits all biochemical reactions and physiological
functions to proceed with maximal efﬁciency
and thus, enhance the overall ‘ﬁtness’ of the
species. This constancy, for example, could
be in terms of optimal temperature and
osmotic concentration of body ﬂuids. Ideally
then, the organism should try to maintain
the constancy of its internal environment (a
process called homeostasis) despite varying
external environmental conditions that tend
to upset its homeostasis. Let us take an
analogy to clarify this important concept.
Suppose a person is able to perform his / her
best when the temperature is 25°C and
wishes to maintain it so, even when it is

Partial regulators

Internal level —>

 

External level—>

Figure 13.3 Diagrammatic representation of

scorchingly hot or freezingly cold outside. It organismic response
could be achieved at home, in the car while
travelling, and at workplace by using an air conditioner in summer and 223

 

heater in winter. Then his / her performance would be always maximal
regardless of the weather around him / her. Here the person’s homeostasis
is accomplished, not through physiological, but artiﬁcial means. How do
other living organisms cope with the situation? Let us look at various
possibilities (Figure 1 3.3).

2019-2020