316

 

BIOLOGY

21. 1 NEURAL SYSTEM

The neural system of all animals is composed of highly specialised cells called
neurons which can detect, receive and transmit different kinds of stimuli.

The neural organisation is very simple in lower invertebrates. For
example, in Hydra it is composed of a network of neurons. The neural
system is better organised in insects, where a brain is present along with
a number of ganglia and neural tissues. The vertebrates have a more
developed neural system.

21.2 HUMAN NEURAL SYSTEM

The human neural system is divided into two parts :
(i) the central neural system (CNS)
(ii) the peripheral neural system (PNS)

The CNS includes the brain and the spinal cord and is the site of
information processing and control. The PNS comprises of all the nerves
of the body associated with the CNS (brain and spinal cord). The nerve
ﬁbres of the PNS are of two types :

(a) afferent fibres

(b) efferent ﬁbres

The afferent nerve ﬁbres transmit impulses from tissues / organs to
the CNS and the efferent ﬁbres transmit regulatory impulses from the
CNS to the concerned peripheral tissues / organs.

The PNS is divided into two divisions called somatic neural system
and autonomic neural system. The somatic neural system relays
impulses from the CNS to skeletal muscles while the autonomic neural
system transmits impulses from the CNS to the involuntary organs and
smooth muscles of the body. The autonomic neural system is further
classiﬁed into sympathetic neural system and parasympathetic neural
system.

Visceral nervous system is the part of the peripheral nervous system
that comprises the whole complex of nerves, ﬁbres, ganglia, and plexuses
by which impulses travel from the central nervous system to the viscera
and from the viscera to the central nervous system.

21.3 NEURON As STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL UNIT 0F
NEURAL SYSTEM

A neuron is a microscopic structure composed of three major parts, namely,
cell body, dendrites and axon (Figure 2 1. 1). The cell body contains cytoplasm
with typical cell organelles and certain granular bodies called Nissl’s granules
Short ﬁbres which branch repeatedly and project out of the cell body also