BIOLOGY

to introduce these into host organisms and thus change the
phenotype of the host organism.

(ii) Bioprocess engineering: Maintenance of sterile (microbial
contamination-free) ambience in chemical engineering processes
to enable growth of only the desired microbe / eukaryotic cell in
large quantities for the manufacture of biotechnological products
like antibiotics, vaccines, enzymes, etc.

Let us now understand the conceptual development of the principles
of genetic engineering.

You probably appreciate the advantages of sexual reproduction over
asexual reproduction. The former provides opportunities for variations
and formulation of unique combinations of genetic setup, some of which
may be beneﬁcial to the organism as well as the population. Asexual
reproduction preserves the genetic information, while sexual reproduction
permits variation. Traditional hybridisation procedures used in plant and
animal breeding, very often lead to inclusion and multiplication of
undesirable genes along with the desired genes. The techniques of genetic
engineering which include creation of recombinant DNA, use of
gene cloning and gene transfer, overcome this limitation and allows us
to isolate and introduce only one or a set of desirable genes without
introducing undesirable genes into the target organism.

Do you know the likely fate of a piece of DNA, which is somehow
transferred into an alien organism? Most likely, this piece of DNA would
not be able to multiply itself in the progeny cells of the organism. But,
when it gets integrated into the genome of the recipient, it may multiply
and be inherited along with the host DNA. This is because the alien piece
of DNA has become part of a chromosome, which has the ability to
replicate. In a chromosome there is a speciﬁc DNA sequence called the
origin of replication, which is responsible for initiating replication.
Therefore, for the multiplication of any alien piece of DNA in an organism
it needs to be a part of a chromosome(s) which has a speciﬁc sequence
known as ‘origin of replication’. Thus, an alien DNA is linked with the
origin of replication, so that, this alien piece of DNA can replicate and
multiply itself in the host organism. This can also be called as cloning or
making multiple identical copies of any template DNA.

Let us now focus on the ﬁrst instance of the construction of an artiﬁcial
recombinant DNA molecule. The construction of the ﬁrst recombinant
DNA emerged from the possibility of linking a gene encoding antibiotic
resistance with a native plasmid (autonomously replicating circular
extra-chromosomal DNA) of Salmonella typhimurium. Stanley Cohen and
Herbert Boyer accomplished this in 1972 by isolating the antibiotic
resistance gene by cutting out a piece of DNA from a plasmid which was
responsible for conferring antibiotic resistance. The cutting of DNA at
speciﬁc locations became possible with the discovery of the so-called

2019-2020