REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS

Reproduction is defined as a biological process in which an
organism gives rise to young ones (offspring) similar to itself. The offspring
grow, mature and in turn produce new offspring. Thus, there is a cycle
of birth, growth and death. Reproduction enables the continuity of the
species, generation after generation. You will study later in Chapter 5
(Principles of Inheritance and Variation) how genetic variation is created
and inherited during reproduction.

There is a large diversity in the biological world and each organism
has evolved its own mechanism to multiply and produce offspring.
The organism’s habitat, its internal physiology and several other factors
are collectively responsible for how it reproduces. Based on whether
there is participation of one organism or two in the process of
reproduction, it is of two types. When offspring is produced by a single
parent with or without the involvement of gamete formation, the
reproduction is asexual. When two parents (opposite sex) participate in
the reproductive process and also involve fusion of male and female
gametes, it is called sexual reproduction.

1 . 1 ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION

In this method, a single individual (parent) is capable of producing
offspring. As a result, the offspring that are produced are not only
identical to one another but are also exact copies of their parent.
Are these offspring likely to be genetically identical or different?
The term clone is used to describe such morphologically and
genetically similar individuals.

Bud

   

Parent cell

(a)

Figure 1.2 Cell division in unicellular organism: (a) Budding in
yeast; (b) Binary fission in Amoeba

Let us see how widespread asexual reproduction is, among different
groups of organisms. Asexual reproduction is common among
single-celled organisms, and in plants and animals with relatively simple
organisations. In Protists and Monerans, the organism or the parent
cell divides by mitosis into two to give rise to new individuals (Figure 1.2).
Thus, in these organisms cell division is itself a mode of reproduction.

2019-2020