PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS

 

channel of the CFO of the ATP synthase. The ATP synthase enzyme consists
of two parts: one called the CFO is embedded in the thylakoid membrane
and forms a transmembrane channel that carries out facilitated diffusion
of protons across the membrane. The other portion is called CF1 and
protrudes on the outer surface of the thylakoid membrane on the side
that faces the stroma. The break down of the gradient provides enough
energy to cause a conformational change in the CF1 particle of the ATP
synthase, which makes the enzyme synthesise several molecules of energy-
packed ATP.

Chemiosmosis requires a membrane, a proton pump, a proton
gradient and ATP synthase. Energy is used to pump protons across a
membrane, to create a gradient or a high concentration of protons within
the thylakoid lumen. ATP synthase has a channel that allows diffusion of
protons back across the membrane; this releases enough energy to activate
ATP synthase enzyme that catalyses the formation of ATP.

Along with the NADPH produced by the movement of electrons, the
ATP will be used immediately in the biosynthetic reaction taking place in
the stroma, responsible for ﬁxing 002, and synthesis of sugars.

13.7 WHERE ARE THE ATP AND NADPH USED?

We learnt that the products of light reaction are ATP, NADPH and 02. Of
these 02 diffuses out of the chloroplast while ATP and NADPH are used to
drive the processes leading to the synthesis of food, more accurately, sugars.
This is the biosynthetic phase of photosynthesis. This process does not
directly depend on the presence of light but is dependent on the products
of the light reaction, i.e., ATP and NADPH, besides CO2 and H20. You may
wonder how this could be veriﬁed; it is simple: immediately after light
becomes unavailable, the biosynthetic process continues for some time,
and then stops. If then, light is made available, the synthesis starts again.

Can we, hence, say that calling the biosynthetic phase as the dark
reaction is a misnomer? Discuss this amongst yourselves.

Let us now see how the ATP and NADPH are used in the biosynthetic
phase. We saw earlier that CO2 is combined with H20 to produce (CH20)n
or sugars. It was of interest to scientists to ﬁnd out how this reaction
proceeded, or rather what was the ﬁrst product formed when CO2 is taken
into a reaction or ﬁxed. Just after world war 11, among the several efforts
to put radioisotopes to beneﬁcial use, the work of Melvin Calvin is
exemplary. The use of radioactive 14C by him in algal photosynthesis
studies led to the discovery that the ﬁrst CO2 ﬁxation product was a
3-carbon organic acid. He also contributed to working out the complete
biosynthetic pathway; hence it was called Calvin cycle after him. The
ﬁrst product identiﬁed was 3-phosphoglyceric acid or in short PGA.
How many carbon atoms does it have?