BIOLOGY

 

 

Gas placed over the slurry, which
keeps on rising as the gas is
produced in the tank due to the
microbial activity. The biogas
plant has an outlet, which is
connected to a pipe to supply
biogas to nearby houses. The
spent slurry is removed through
another outlet and may be used
as fertiliser. Cattle dung is
available in large quantities in
rural areas where cattle are used
for a variety of purposes. So
biogas plants are more often
built in rural areas. The biogas
thus produced is used for
cooking and lighting. The
picture of a biogas plant is
shown in Figure 10.8. The

Figure 10.8 A typical biOgaS Plant technologl of biogas production

was developed in India mainly
due to the efforts of Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) and
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC). If your school is situated
in a village or near a village, it would be very interesting to enquire if there
are any biogas plants nearby. Visit the biogas plant and learn more about
it from the people who are actually managing it.

 

     
     

Gas-holder

  

Sludge

Digester

10.5 MICROBES AS BIOCONTROL AGENTS

Biocontrol refers to the use of biological methods for controlling plant
diseases and pests. In modern society, these problems have been tackled
increasingly by the use of chemicals — by use of insecticides and pesticides.
These chemicals are toxic and extremely harmful, to human beings and
animals alike, and have been polluting our environment (soil, ground
water), fruits, vegetables and crop plants. Our soil is also polluted through
our use of weedicides to remove weeds.

Biological control of pests and diseases: In agriculture, there is a
method of controlling pests that relies on natural predation rather than
introduced chemicals. A key belief of the organic farmer is that biodiversity
furthers health. The more variety a landscape has, the more sustainable
it is. The organic farmer, therefore, works to create a system where the
insects that are sometimes called pests are not eradicated, but instead
are kept at manageable levels by a complex system of checks and balances
within a living and vibrant ecosystem. Contrary to the ‘conventional’
farming practices which often use chemical methods to kill both useful

2019-2020