BIOLOGY

 

three decades. Scientists believe that this rise in temperature is leading
to deleterious changes in the environment and resulting in odd climatic
changes (e. g. El Nino effect) , thus leading to increased melting of polar
ice caps as well as of other places like the Himalayan snow caps. Over
many years, this will result in a rise in sea level that can submerge many
coastal areas. The total spectrum of changes that global warming can
bring about is a subject that is still under active research.

How can we control global warming? The measures include cutting
down use of fossil fuel, improving efﬁciency of energy usage, reducing
deforestation, planting trees and slowing down the growth of human
population. International initiatives are also being taken to reduce the
emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.

16.7 OZONE DEPLETION IN THE STRATo-
SPHERE

You have earlier studied in the Chemistry
textbook of Class XI about ‘bad’ ozone, formed
in the lower atmosphere (troposphere) that harms
plants and animals. There is ‘good’ ozone also;
this ozone is found in the upper part of the
atmosphere called the stratosphere, and it acts
as a shield absorbing ultraviolet radiation from
the sun. UV rays are highly injurious to living
organisms since DNA and proteins of living
organisms preferentially absorb UV rays, and its
high energy breaks the chemical bonds within
these molecules. The thickness of the ozone in a
column of air from the ground to the top of the
atmosphere is measured in terms of Dobson

 

Figure 16.8 Ozone hole is the area above
Antarctica, shown in purple

colour, where the ozone layer
is the thinnest. Ozone
thickness is given in Dobson
unit (see carefully the scale

units (DU).
Ozone gas is continuously formed by the
action of UV rays on molecular oxygen, and also

shown in colour violet to red).
The ozone hole over Antarctica
develops each year between
late August and early
October. Courtesy: NASA

degraded into molecular oxygen in the
stratosphere. There should be a balance between
production and degradation of ozone in the
stratosphere. Of late, the balance has been
disrupted due to enhancement of ozone
degradation by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
CFCs ﬁnd wide use as refrigerants. CFCs discharged in the lower part of
atmosphere move upward and reach stratosphere. In stratosphere, UV
rays act on them releasing Cl atoms. Cl degrades ozone releasing
molecular oxygen, with these atoms acting merely as catalysts; Cl atoms
are not consumed in the reaction. Hence, whatever CFCs are added to
the stratosphere, they have permanent and continuing effects on Ozone

2019-2020