212

Photosystem II Photosystem I

      
 

, - acceptor

   
  
 

  

Electron
transport

    

H20 —> 2e-+ 2H+ + [0]

Figure 13.5 Z scheme of light reaction

0‘3pr11
NADP+

 

BIOLOGY

system consisting of cytochromes (Figure
13.5). This movement of electrons is downhill,
in terms of an oxidation-reduction or redox
potential scale. The electrons are not used up
as they pass through the electron transport
chain, but are passed on to the pigments of
photosystem PS I. Simultaneously, electrons
in the reaction centre of PS I are also excited
when they receive red light of wavelength 700
nm and are transferred to another accepter
molecule that has a greater redox potential.
These electrons then are moved downhill
again, this time to a molecule of energy-rich
NADP’“. The addition of these electrons reduces
NADP+ to NADPH + H“. This whole scheme of
transfer of electrons, starting from the PS 11,
uphill to the acceptor, down the electron
transport chain to PS I, excitation of electrons,

transfer to another acceptor, and ﬁnally down hill to NADP+ reducing it to
NADPH + H+ is called the Z scheme, due to its characterstic shape (Figure
13.5). This shape is formed when all the carriers are placed in a sequence

on a redox potential scale.

13.6. 1 Splitting of Water

You would then ask, How does PS II supply electrons continuously? The
electrons that were moved from photosystem 11 must be replaced. This is
achieved by electrons available due to splitting of water. The splitting of
water is associated with the PS 11; water is split into 2H“, [0] and electrons.
This creates oxygen, one of the net products of photosynthesis. The
electrons needed to replace those removed from photosystem I are provided

by photosystem II.

 

 
 

We need to emphasise here that the water splitting complex is associated
with the PS 11, which itself is physically located on the inner side of the
membrane of the thylakoid. Then, where are the protons and 02 formed
likely to be released — in the lumen? or on the outer side of the membrane?

13.6.2 Cyclic and Non-cyclic Photo-phosphorylation

Living organisms have the capability of extracting energy from oxidisable
substances and store this in the form ofbond energy. Special substances like
ATP, carry this energy in their chemical bonds. The process through which