CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE

formation, DNA replication and distribution to daughter cells. They also
help in respiration, secretion processes, to increase the surface area of
the plasma membrane and enzymatic content. In some prokaryotes like
cyanobacteria, there are other membranous extensions into the cytoplasm
called chromatophores which contain pigments.

Bacterial cells may be motile or non-motile. If motile, they have thin
ﬁlamentous extensions from their cell wall called ﬂagella. Bacteria show a
range in the number and arrangement of ﬂagella. Bacterial ﬂagellum is
composed of three parts — ﬁlament, hook and basal body. The ﬁlament
is the longest portion and extends from the cell surface to the outside.

Besides ﬂagella, Pili and Fimbriae are also surface structures of the
bacteria but do not play a role in motility. The pili are elongated tubular
structures made of a special protein. The fimbriae are small bristle like
fibres sprouting out of the cell. In some bacteria, they are known to help
attach the bacteria to rocks in streams and also to the host tissues.

8.4.2 Ribosomes and Inclusion Bodies

In prokaryotes, ribosomes are associated with the plasma membrane of
the cell. They are about 15 nm by 20 nm in size and are made of two
subunits - 508 and SOS units which when present together form 708
prokaryotic ribosomes. Ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis. Several
ribosomes may attach to a single mRNA and form a chain called
polyribosomes or polysome. The ribosomes of a polysome translate the
mRNA into proteins.

Inclusion bodies: Reserve material in prokaryotic cells are stored in
the cytoplasm in the form of inclusion bodies. These are not bound by
any membrane system and lie free in the cytoplasm, e.g., phosphate
granules, cyanophycean granules and glycogen granules. Gas vacuoles
are found in blue green and purple and green photosynthetic bacteria.

8.5 EUKARYOTIC CELLS

The eukaryotes include all the protists, plants, animals and fungi. In
eukaryotic cells there is an extensive compartmentalisation of cytoplasm
through the presence of membrane bound organelles. Eukaryotic cells
possess an organised nucleus with a nuclear envelope. In addition,
eukaryotic cells have a variety of complex locomotory and cytoskeletal
structures. Their genetic material is organised into chromosomes.

All eukaryotic cells are not identical. Plant and animal cells are different
as the former possess cell walls, plastids and a large central vacuole which
are absent in animal cells. On the other hand, animal cells have centrioles
which are absent in almost all plant cells (Figure 8.3).

129