160

 

BIOLOGY

biomolecules. Amino acids, monosaccharide and disaccharide sugars, fatty acids,
glycerol, nucleotides, nucleosides and nitrogen bases are some of the organic
compounds seen in living organisms. There are 20 types of amino acids and 5
types of nucleotides. Fats and oils are glycerides in which fatty acids are esteriﬁed
to glycerol. Phospholipids contain, in addition, a phosphorylated nitrogenous
compound.

Only three types of macromolecules, i.e., proteins, nucleic acids and
polysaccharides are found in living systems. Lipids, because of their association
with membranes separate in the macromolecular fraction. Biomacromolecules
are polymers. They are made of building blocks which are different. Proteins
are heteropolymers made of amino acids. Nucleic acids (RNA and DNA) are
composed of nucleotides. Biomacromolecules have a hierarchy of structures —
primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary. Nucleic acids serve as genetic
material. Polysaccharides are components of cell wall in plants, fungi and also
of the exoskeleton of arthropods. They also are storage forms of energy (e. g.,
starch and glycogen). Proteins serve a variety of cellular fugctions. Many of
them are enzymes, some are antibodies, somg) are receptors, some are hormones
and some others are structural proteins. C agen is the mostgﬁbundant protein
in animal world and Ribulose bisphosphae Gareboxylase- -ﬂﬁx§genase (RuBisCO)
is the most abundant protein in the “glolepf the biospliere.

Enzymes are proteins which catalyse blochemicéltreactlons in the cells.
Ribozymes are nucleic acids w} scatalytm powngProteinaceous enzymes
exhibit substrate specificity, reéuire ﬁgtfrnum temperature and pH for maximal
activity. They are denatured at high temperatures. Enzymes lower activation
energy of reactions and enhance greatly the rate of the reactions. Nucleic acids
carry hereditary information and are passed on from parental generation to

progeny.

EXERCISES

What are macromolecules? Give examples.
Illustrate a glycosidic, peptide and a phospho-diester bond.
What is meant by tertiary structure of proteins?

F9330!"

Find and write down structures of 10 interesting small molecular weight
biomolecules. Find if there is any industry which manufactures the compounds
by isolation. Find out who are the buyers.

5. Proteins have primary structure. If you are given a method to know which amino
acid is at either of the two termini (ends) of a protein, can you connect this
information to purity or homogeneity of a protein?

6. Find out and make a list of proteins used as therapeutic agents. Find other
applications of proteins (e. g., Cosmetics etc.)

7. Explain the composition of triglyceride.