BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION

 

Fibrinogens are needed for clotting or coagulation of blood. Globulins
primarly are involved in defense mechanisms of the body and the albumins
help in osmotic balance. Plasma also contains small amounts of minerals
like Na“, Ca“, Mg“, HCOg, 01‘, etc. Glucose, amino acids, lipids, etc., are
also present in the plasma as they are always in transit in the body. Factors
for coagulation or clotting of blood are also present in the plasma in an
inactive form. Plasma without the clotting factors is called serum.

18. 1 .2 Formed Elements

Erythrocytes, leucocytes and platelets are collectively called formed
elements Wigure 18. 1) and they constitute nearly 45 per cent of the blood.

Erythrocytes or red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant of all
the cells in blood. A healthy adult man has, on an average, 5 millions to
5.5 millions of RBCs mm‘3 of blood. RBCs are formed in the red bone
marrow in the adults. RBCs are devoid of nucleus in most of the mammals
and are biconcave in shape. They have a red coloured, iron containing
complex protein called haemoglobin, hence the colour and name of these
cells. A healthy individual has 12- 16 gms of haemoglobin in every
100 ml of blood. These molecules play a signiﬁcant role in transport of
respiratory gases. RBCs have an average life span of 120 days after which
they are destroyed in the spleen (graveyard of RBCs).

Leucocytes are also known as white blood cells (WBC) as they are
colourless due to the lack of haemoglobin. They are nucleated and are
relatively lesser in number which averages 6000-8000 mm‘3 of blood.
Leucocytes are generally short lived. We have two main categories of WBCs
— granulocytes and agranulocytes. Neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils
are different types of granulocytes, while lymphocytes and monocytes
are the agranulocytes. Neutrophils are the most abundant cells (60-65
per cent) of the total WBCs and basophils are the least (0.5- 1 per cent)
among them. Neutrophils and monocytes (6-8 per cent) are phagocytic
cells which destroy foreign organisms entering the body. Basophils secrete
histamine, serotonin, heparin, etc., and are involved in inﬂammatory
reactions. Eosinophils (2-3 per cent) resist infections and are also

         
     
 

Eosinophil Neutrophil

RBC "W
. 0':

Platelets Basophil

“ ‘ T lymphocyte

G

 
    

     

B lymphocyte

Figure 18.1 Diagrammatic representation of formed elements in blood