MINERAL NUTRITION

suitable for the plant growth was obtained. By this
method, essential elements were identiﬁed and
their deﬁciency symptoms discovered. Hydroponics
has been successfully employed as a technique for
the commercial production of vegetables such as
tomato, seedless cucumber and lettuce. It must be
emphasised that the nutrient solutions must be
adequately aerated to obtain the optimum growth.
What would happen if solutions were poorly
aerated? Diagrammatic views of the hydroponic
technique is given in Figures 12.1 and 12.2.

12.2 ESSENTIAL MINERAL ELEMENTS

Most of the minerals present in soil can enter plants
through roots. In fact, more than sixty elements of
the 105 discovered so far are found in different
plants. Some plant species accumulate selenium,
some others gold, while some plants growing near
nuclear test sites take up radioactive strontium.
There are techniques that are able to detect the
minerals even at a very low concentration (10‘8 g/
mL). The question is, whether all the diverse mineral
elements present in a plant, for example, gold and
selenium as mentioned above, are really necessary
for plants? How do we decide what is essential for
plants and what is not?

12.2. 1 Criteria for Essentiality

The criteria for essentiality of an element are given
below:

(a) The element must be absolutely necessary for
supporting normal growth and reproduction.
In the absence of the element the plants do not
complete their life cycle or set the seeds.

(b) The requirement of the element must be speciﬁc
and not replaceable by another element. In
other words, deﬁciency of any one element
cannot be met by supplying some other
element.

(c) The element must be directly involved in the
metabolism of the plant.

 

    
 

195

Funnel for
adding water
and nutrients [1,

Figure 12.1 Diagram of a typical set-up for
nutrient solution culture

 

 

Nutrient

Figure 12.2 Hydroponic plant production.
Plants are grown in a tube or
trough placed on a slight
incline. A pump circulates a
nutrient solution from a
reservoir to the elevated end of
the tube. The solution ﬂows
down the tube and returns to
the reservoir due to gravity.
Inset shows a plant whose
roots are continuously bathed
in aerated nutrient solution.
The arrows indicates the
direction of the ﬂow.