232

Pyruvate
(3C)

CoA \ NAD+
NADH+IF
CO

Acetyl coenzyme A2

(10
Oxaloacetic acid

(4C) Citric acid

NADH+IF (6C) \_,co,
+ \ NAD+
NAD
NADH+I-F

ot-ketoglutaric acid

BIOLOGY

and then succinyl—CoA In the remaining steps
of citric acid cycle, succinyl-CoA is oxidised
to OAA allowing the cycle to continue. During
the conversion of succinyl-CoA to succinic
acid a molecule of GTP is synthesised. This is
a substrate level phosphorylation. In a
coupled reaction GTP is converted to GDP with
the simultaneous synthesis of ATP from ADP.
Also there are three points in the cycle where
NAD+ is reduced to NADH + H“ and one point

Malic acid (50) where FAD’“ is reduced to FADHZ. The
(4C3 CITRIC ACID CYCLE Algco2 continued oxidation of acetyl CoA via the TCA
FADHZ .j‘ . I NAD+ cycle requires the continued replenishment of
FAD+ ‘ ‘ ~ Succinic acid ‘ ' GDP NADH’H oxaloacetic acid, the ﬁrst member of the cycle.
(4c) ‘ - In addition it also requires regeneration of

Figure 14.3 The Citric acid cycle

NAD+ and FAD+ from NADH and FADH2
respectively. The summary equation for this
phase of respiration may be written as follows:

 

We have till now seen that glucose has been broken down to release
CO2 and eight molecules of NADH + H’“; two of FADH2 have been
synthesised besides just two molecules of ATP in TCA cycle. You may be
wondering why we have been discussing respiration at all — neither 02
has come into the picture nor the promised large number of ATP has yet
been synthesised. Also what is the role of the NADH + H’“ and FADH2 that
is synthesised? Let us now understand the role of O2 in respiration and
how ATP is synthesised.

14.4.2 Electron Transport System (ETS) and Oxidative
Phosphorylation

The following steps in the respiratory process are to release and utilise
the energy stored in NADH+H+ and FADHZ This is accomplished when
they are oxidised through the electron transport system and the electrons
are passed on to 02 resulting in the formation of H20. The metabolic
pathway through which the electron passes from one carrier to another,
is called the electron transport system (ETS) (Figure 14.4) and it is
present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons from NADH