334

 

Figure 22.3 Diagrammatic View of the
position of Thyroid and
Parathyroid
(a) Ventral side
(b) Dorsal side

BIOLOGY

after ovulation. FSH stimulates growth and
development of the ovarian follicles in females. MSH
acts on the melanocytes (melanin containing cells) and
regulates pigmentation of the skin. Oxytocin acts on

the smooth muscles of our body and stimulates their
contraction. In females, it stimulates a vigorous
contraction of uterus at the time of child birth, and milk
ejection from the mammary gland. Vasopressin acts
mainly at the kidney and stimulates resorption of water
and electrolytes by the distal tubules and thereby
reduces loss of water through urine (diuresis). Hence,
it is also called as anti-diuretic hormone (ADH).

An impairment affecting synthesis or release of ADH
results in a diminished ability of the kidney to conserve
water leading to water loss and dehydration. This
condition is known as Diabetes Insipidus.

22.2.3 The Pineal Gland

The pineal gland is located on the dorsal side of
forebrain. Pineal secretes a hormone called melatonin.
Melatonin plays a very important role in the regulation
of a 24-hour (diurnal) rhythm of our body. For
example, it helps in maintaining the normal rhythms
of sleep-wake cycle, body temperature. In addition,
melatonin also inﬂuences metabolism, pigmentation,
the menstrual cycle as well as our defense capability.

22.2.4 Thyroid Gland

The thyroid gland is composed of two lobes which are
located on either side of the trachea (Figure 22.3). Both
the lobes are interconnected with a thin ﬂap of connective
tissue called isthmus. The thyroid gland is composed of
follicles and stromal tissues. Each thyroid follicle is
composed of follicular cells, enclosing a cavity. These
follicular cells synthesise two hormones,
tetraiodothyronine or thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3). Iodine is essential for the normal
rate of hormone synthesis in the thyroid. Deﬁciency of
iodine in our diet results in hypothyroidism and
enlargement of the thyroid gland, commonly called
goitre. Hypothyroidism during pregnancy causes
defective development and maturation of the growing