MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE

In chapter 8, you have read that microbes cause a large number of
diseases in human beings. They also cause diseases in animals and plants.
But this should not make you think that all microbes are harmful; several
microbes are useful to man in diverse ways. Some of the most important
contributions of microbes to human welfare are discussed in this chapter.

10.1 MICROBES IN HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS

You would be surprised to know that we use microbes or products
derived from them everyday. A common example is the production of
curd from milk. Micro-organisms such as Lactobacillus and others
commonly called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk and convert it
to curd. During growth, the LAB produce acids that coagulate and
partially digest the milk proteins. A small amount of curd added to the
fresh milk as inoculum or starter contain millions of LAB, which at
suitable temperatures multiply, thus converting milk to curd, which
also improves its nutritional quality by increasing vitamin B12. In our
stomach too, the LAB play very beneﬁcial role in checking disease-
causing microbes.

The dough, which is used for making foods such as dosa and idli is
also fermented by bacteria. The puffed-up appearance of dough is due to
the production of CO2 gas. Can you tell which metabolic pathway is
taking place resulting in the formation of C02? Where do you think the
bacteria for these fermentations come from? Similarly the dough, which
is used for making bread, is fermented using baker’s yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae). A number of traditional drinks and foods
are also made by fermentation by the microbes. ‘Toddy’, a traditional
drink of some parts of southern India is made by fermenting sap from
palms. Microbes are also used to ferment ﬁsh, soyabean and bamboo-
shoots to make foods. Cheese, is one of the oldest food items in which
microbes were used. Different varieties of cheese are known by their
characteristic texture, ﬂavour and taste, the speciﬁcity coming from the
microbes used. For example, the large holes in ‘Swiss cheese’ are due to
production of a large amount of CO2 by a bacterium named
Propionibacterium sharmanii. The ‘Roquefort cheese’ are ripened by
growing a speciﬁc fungi on them, which gives them a particular ﬂavour.

10.2 MICROBES IN INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS

Even in industry, microbes are used to synthesise a number of products
valuable to human beings. Beverages and antibiotics are some examples.
Production on an industrial scale, requires growing microbes in very large
vessels called fermentors (Figure 10.4).

2019—2020