SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

pollen tube. Pollen tube grows through the tissues of the stigma and
style and reaches the ovary (Figure 2.12b, c). You would recall that in
some plants, pollen grains are shed at two-celled condition (a vegetative
cell and a generative cell). In such plants, the generative cell divides and
forms the two male gametes during the growth of pollen tube in the stigma.
In plants which shed pollen in the three-celled condition, pollen tubes
carry the two male gametes from the beginning. Pollen tube, after reaching
the ovary, enters the ovule through the micropyle and then enters one of
the synergids through the ﬁliform apparatus (Figure 2. 12d, e). Many recent
studies have shown that ﬁliform apparatus present at the micropylar part
of the synergids guides the entry of pollen tube. All these events—from
pollen deposition on the stigma until pollen tubes enter the ovule—are
together referred to as pollen-pistil interaction. As pointed out earlier,
pollen-pistil interaction is a dynamic process involving pollen recognition
followed by promotion or inhibition of the pollen. The knowledge gained
in this area would help the plant breeder in manipulating pollen-pistil
interaction, even in incompatible pollinations, to get desired hybrids.

You can easily study pollen germination by dusting some pollen from
ﬂowers such as pea, chickpea, Crotalaria, balsam and Vinca on a glass slide
containing a drop of sugar solution (about 10 per cent). After about 15—30
minutes, observe the slide under the low power lens of the microscope. You
are likely to see pollen tubes coming out of the pollen grains.

As you shall learn in the chapter on plant breeding (Chapter 9), a
breeder is interested in crossing different species and often genera to
combine desirable characters to produce commercially ‘superior’ varieties.
Artificial hybridisation is one of the major approaches of crop
improvement programme. In such crossing experiments it is important
to make sure that only the desired pollen grains are used for pollination
and the stigma is protected from contamination (from unwanted pollen).
This is achieved by emasculation and bagging techniques.

If the female parent bears bisexual ﬂowers, removal of anthers from
the ﬂower bud before the anther dehisces using a pair of forceps is
necessary. This step is referred to as emasculation. Emasculated ﬂowers
have to be covered with a bag of suitable size, generally made up of butter
paper, to prevent contamination of its stigma with unwanted pollen. This
process is called bagging. When the stigma of bagged ﬂower attains
receptivity, mature pollen grains collected from anthers of the male parent
are dusted on the stigma, and the ﬂowers are rebagged, and the fruits
allowed to develop.

If the female parent produces unisexual ﬂowers, there is no need for
emasculation. The female ﬂower buds are bagged before the ﬂowers open.
When the stigma becomes receptive, pollination is carried out using the
desired pollen and the ﬂower rebagged.

2019-2020