BIOLOGY

process and ecological information of organisms are essential and form
the basis of modern taxonomic studies.

Hence, characterisation, identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation and nomenclature
are the processes that are basic to taxonomy.

Taxonomy is not something new. Human beings have always been
interested in knowing more and more about the various kinds of
organisms, particularly with reference to their own use. In early days,
human beings needed to ﬁnd sources for their basic needs of food, clothing
and shelter. Hence, the earliest classiﬁcations were based on the ‘uses’ of
various organisms.

Human beings were, since long, not only interested in knowing more
about different kinds of organisms and their diversities, but also the
relationships among them. This branch of study was referred to as
systematics. The word systematics is derived from the Latin word
‘systema’ which means systematic arrangement of organisms. Linnaeus
used Systema Naturae as the title of his publication. The scope of
systematics was later enlarged to include identiﬁcation, nomenclature
and classification. Systematics takes into account evolutionary
relationships between organisms.

1 .3 TAXONOMIC CATEGORIES

Classiﬁcation is not a single step process but involves hierarchy of steps
in which each step represents a rank or category. Since the category is a
part of overall taxonomic arrangement, it is called the taxonomic category
and all categories together constitute the taxonomic hierarchy. Each
category, referred to as a unit of classiﬁcation, in fact, represents a rank
and is commonly termed as taxon (pl.: taxa).

Taxonomic categories and hierarchy can be illustrated by an example.
Insects represent a group of organisms sharing common features like
three pairs of jointed legs. It means insects are recognisable concrete
objects which can be classiﬁed, and thus were given a rank or category.
Can you name other such groups of organisms? Remember, groups
represent category. Category further denotes rank. Each rank or taxon,
in fact, represents a unit of classiﬁcation. These taxonomic groups/
categories are distinct biological entities and not merely morphological
aggregates.

Taxonomical studies of all known organisms have led to the
development of common categories such as kingdom, phylum or division
(for plants), class, order, family, genus and species. All organisms,
including those in the plant and animal kingdoms have species as the
lowest category. Now the question you may ask is, how to place an