70

Lamina

     

Stipule

Petiole

Axillary
bud

(a) base

   

(b) (C)

Figure 5.7 Structure of a leaf :
(a) Parts of a leaf
(b) Reticulate venation
(c) Parallel venation

‘\

    
   

Rachis

(b) Silk Cotton
(a) Neem

Figure 5.8 Compound leaves :
(a) pinnately compound leaf
(b) palmately compound leaf

BIOLOGY

bear two lateral small leaf like structures called
stipules. In monocotyledons, the leaf base expands
into a sheath covering the stem partially or wholly.
In some leguminous plants the leafbase may
become swollen, which is called the pulvinus. The
petiole help hold the blade to light. Long thin ﬂexible
petioles allow leaf blades to ﬂutter in wind, thereby
cooling the leaf and bringing fresh air to leaf surface.
The lamina or the leaf blade is the green expanded
part of the leaf with veins and veinlets. There is,
usually, a middle prominent vein, which is known
as the midrib. Veins provide rigidity to the leaf blade
and act as channels of transport for water, minerals
and food materials. The shape, margin, apex, surface
and extent of incision of lamina varies in different
leaves.

5.3. 1 Venation

The arrangement of veins and the veinlets in the
lamina of leaf is termed as venation. When the
veinlets form a network, the venation is termed as
reticulate (Figure 5.7 b). When the veins run
parallel to each other within a lamina, the venation
is termed as parallel (Figure 5.7 0). Leaves of
dicotyledonous plants generally possess reticulate
venation, while parallel venation is the characteristic
of most monocotyledons.

5.3.2 Types of Leaves

A leaf is said to be simple, when its lamina is entire
or when incised, the incisions do not touch the
midrib. When the incisions of the lamina reach up
to the midrib breaking it into a number of leaﬂets,
the leaf is called compound. A bud is present
in the am’l of petiole in both simple and compound
leaves, but not in the am’l of leaﬂets of the compound
leaf.

The compound leaves may be of two types
(Figure 5.8). In a pinnately compound leaf a
number of leaﬂets are present on a common axis,
the rachis, which represents the midrib of the leaf
as in neem.