278

 

BIOLOGY

excreta, using dry composting toilets. This is a practical, hygienic, efﬁcient
and cost-effective solution to human waste disposal. The key point to
note here is that with this composting method, human excreta can be
recycled into a resource (as natural fertiliser), which reduces the need for
chemical fertilisers. There are working ‘EcoSan’ toilets in many areas of
Kerala and Sri Lanka.

16.3 SOLID WASTES

Solid wastes refer to everything that goes out in trash. Municipal solid
wastes are wastes from homes, ofﬁces, stores, schools, hospitals, etc.,
that are collected and disposed by the municipality. The municipal solid
wastes generally comprise paper, food wastes, plastics, glass, metals,
rubber, leather, textile, etc. Burning reduces the volume of the wastes,
although it is generally not burnt to completion and open dumps often
serve as the breeding ground for rats and ﬂies. Sanitary landﬁlls were
adopted as the substitute for open-burning dumps. In a sanitary landﬁll,
wastes are dumped in a depression or trench after compaction, and
covered with dirt everyday. If you live in a town or city, do you know
where the nearest landﬁll site is? Landﬁlls are also not really much of a
solution since the amount of garbage generation specially in the metros
has increased so much that these sites are getting filled too. Also there
is danger of seepage of chemicals, etc., from these landﬁlls polluting the
underground water resources.

A solution to all this can only be in human beings becoming more
sensitive to these environment issues. All waste that we generate can
be categorised into three types — (a) bio-degradable, (b) recyclable and
(c) the non-biodegradable. It is important that all garbage generated is
sorted. What can be reused or recycled should be separated out; our
kabadiwallahs and rag-pickers do a great job of separation of materials
for recycling. The biodegradable materials can be put into deep pits in
the ground and be left for natural breakdown. That leaves only the non-
biodegradable to be disposed off. The need to reduce our garbage
generation should be a prime goal, instead, we are increasing the use of
non-biodegradable products. Just pick any readymade packet of any
‘good quality’ eatable, say a biscuit packet, and study the packaging —
do you see the number of protective layers used? Note that atleast one
layer is of plastic. We have started packaging even our daily use products
like milk and water in polybagsll In cities, fruits and vegetables can be
bought packed in beautiful polysterene and plastic packaging — we pay
so much and what do we do? Contribute heavily to environmental
pollution. State Governments across the country are trying to push for
reduction in use of plastics and use of eco-friendly packaging. We can do
our bit by carrying cloth or other natural ﬁbre carry-bags when we go
shopping and by refusing polythene bags.

2019-2020