CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION

10.1. 1 Phases of Cell Cycle

A typical eukaryotic cell cycle is illustrated by
human cells in culture. These cells divide once
in approximately every 24 hours (Figure 10.1).
However, this duration of cell cycle can vary from
organism to organism and also from cell type
to cell type. Yeast for example, can progress
through the cell cycle in only about 90 minutes.

The cell cycle is divided into two basic
phases:

0 Interphase
o M Phase (Mitosis phase)

The M Phase represents the phase when the
actual cell division or mitosis occurs and the
interphase represents the phase between two
successive M phases. It is significant to note
that in the 24 hour average duration of cell
cycle of a human cell, cell division proper lasts
for only about an hour. The interphase lasts
more than 95% of the duration of cell cycle.

163

M Phase

Metapham‘.

 

Figure 10.1 A diagrammatic view of cell cycle
indicating formation of two cells
from one cell

The M Phase starts with the nuclear division, corresponding to the
separation of daughter chromosomes (karyokinesis) and usually ends
with division of cytoplasm (cytokinesis). The interphase, though called
the resting phase, is the time during which the cell is preparing for division
by undergoing both cell growth and DNA replication in an orderly manner.
The interphase is divided into three further phases:

0 G1 phase (Gap 1)
o S phase (Synthesis)
0 G2 phase (Gap 2)

G1 phase corresponds to the interval between mitosis and initiation
of DNA replication. During G1 phase the cell is metabolically active and
continuously grows but does not replicate its DNA. S or synthesis phase
marks the period during which DNA synthesis or replication takes place.
During this time the amount of DNA per cell doubles. If the initial amount
of DNA is denoted as 2C then it increases to 4C. However, there is no
increase in the chromosome number; if the cell had diploid or 2n number
of chromosomes at G1, even after S phase the number of chromosomes

remains the same, i.e., 2n.

In animal cells, during the S phase, DNA replication begins in the
nucleus, and the centriole duplicates in the cytoplasm. During the G2
phase, proteins are synthesised in preparation for mitosis while cell growth

continues.

How do plants and
animals continue to
grow all their lives?
Do all cells in a plant
divide all the time?
Do you think all cells
continue to divide in
all plants and
animals? Can you
tell the name and the
location of tissues
having cells that
divide all their life in
higher plants? Do
animals have similar
meristematic
tissues?

2019-2020