106

 

BIOLOGY

membrane. Arrival of the disturbance at the neuron’s endings, or output
zone, triggers events that may cause stimulation or inhibition of adjacent
neurons and other cells (You will study the details in Chapter 2 1).

7.2 ORGAN AND ORGAN SYSTEM

The basic tissues mentioned above organise to form organs which in turn
associate to form organ systems in the multicellular organisms. Such an
organisation is essential for more efficient and better coordinated activities
of millions of cells constituting an organism. Each organ in our body is
made of one or more type of tissues. For example, our heart consists of all
the four types of tissues, i.e., epithelial, connective, muscular and neural.
We also notice, after some careful study that the complexity in organ and
organ systems displays certain discernable trend. This discernable trend
is called evolutionary trend (You will study the details in class XII). You
are being introduced to morphology and anatomy of three organisms at
different evolutionary levels to show their organisation and functioning.
Morphology refers to study of form or externally visible features. In the
case of plants or microbes, the term morphology precisely means only
this. In case of animals this refers to the external appearance of the organs
or parts of the body. The word anatomy conventionally is used for the
study of morphology of internal organs in the animals. You will learn the
morphology and anatomy of earthworm, cockroach and frog representing
invertebrates and vertebrates.

7.3 EARTHWORM

Earthworm is a reddish brown terrestrial invertebrate that inhabits the
upper layer of the moist soil. During day time, they live in burrows made
by boring and swallowing the soil. In the gardens, they can be traced by
their faecal deposits known as worm castings. The common Indian
earthworms are Pheretima and Lumbricus.

7 .3. 1 Morphology

Earthworms have long cylindrical body. The body is divided into more
than hundred short segments which are similar (metameres about
100- 120 in number). The dorsal surface of the body is marked by a dark
median mid dorsal line (dorsal blood vessel) along the longitudinal axis of
the body. The ventral surface is distinguished by the presence of genital
openings (pores). Anterior end consists of the mouth and the prostomium,
a lobe which serves as a covering for the mouth and as a wedge to force
open cracks in the soil into which the earthworm may crawl. ’Ihe prostomium
is sensory in function. The ﬁrst body segment is called the peristomium
(buccal segment) which contains the mouth. In a mature worm, segments