BIOLOGY

Natural methods work on the principle of avoiding chances of ovum
and sperms meeting. Periodic abstinence is one such method in which
the couples avoid or abstain from coitus from day 10 to l 7 of the menstrual
cycle when ovulation could be expected. As chances of fertilisation are
very high during this period, it is called the fertile period. Therefore, by

Figure 4.1(a) Condom for male

 

Figure 4.1(b) Condom for female

 

Figure 4.2. Copper T (CuT)

abstaining from coitus during this period, conception could
be prevented. Withdrawal or coitus interruptus is another
method in which the male partner withdraws his penis from
the vagina just before ejaculation so as to avoid
insemination. Lactational amenorrhea (absence of
menstruation) method is based on the fact that ovulation
and therefore the cycle do not occur during the period of
intense lactation following parturition. Therefore, as long
as the mother breast-feeds the child fully, chances of
conception are almost nil. However, this method has been
reported to be effective only upto a maximum period of six
months following parturition. As no medicines or devices
are used in these methods, side effects are almost nil.
Chances of failure, though, of this method are also high.

In barrier methods, ovum and sperms are prevented
from physically meeting with the help of barriers. Such
methods are available for both males and females.
Condoms (Figure 4. 1 a, b) are barriers made of thin rubber /
latex sheath that are used to cover the penis in the male or
vagina and cervix in the female, just before coitus so that
the ejaculated semen would not enter into the female
reproductive tract. This can prevent conception. ‘Nirodh’ is
a popular brand of condom for the male. Use of condoms
has increased in recent years due to its additional benefit of
protecting the user from contracting STIs and AIDS. Both
the male and the female condoms are disposable, can be
self-inserted and thereby gives privacy to the user.
Diaphragms, cervical caps and vaults are also barriers
made of rubber that are inserted into the female reproductive
tract to cover the cervix during coitus. They prevent
conception by blocking the entry of sperms through the
cervix. They are reusable. Spermicidal creams, jellies and
foams are usually used alongwith these barriers to increase
their contraceptive efficiency.

Another effective and popular method is the use of Intra Uterine
m Devices (IUDs). These devices are inserted by doctors or expert nurses
in the uterus through vagina. These Intra Uterine Devices are presently

—

 

available as the non-medicated IUDs (e. g., Lippes loop), copper releasing

IUDs (CuT, Cu7, Multiload 375) and the hormone releasing IUDs
(Progestasert, LNG-20) (Figure 4.2). IUDs increase phagocytosis of sperms
within the uterus and the Cu ions released suppress sperm motility and
the fertilising capacity of sperms. The hormone releasing IUDs, in addition,

2019—2020