BIOLOGY

The term health is very frequently used by everybody. How do we
deﬁne it? Health does not simply mean ‘absence of disease’ or ‘physical
ﬁtness’. It could be defined as a state of complete physical, mental and
social well-being. When people are healthy, they are more efficient at
work. This increases productivity and brings economic prosperity. Health
also increases longevity of people and reduces infant and maternal
mortality.

Balanced diet, personal hygiene and regular exercise are very important
to maintain good health. Yoga has been practised since time immemorial
to achieve physical and mental health. Awareness about diseases and
their effect on different bodily functions, vaccination (immunisation)
against infectious diseases, proper disposal of wastes, control of vectors
and maintenance of hygiene in food and water resources are necessary
for achieving good health.

When the functioning of one or more organs or systems of the body is
adversely affected, characterised by appearance of various signs and
symptoms, we say that we are not healthy, i.e., we have a disease. Diseases
can be broadly grouped into infectious and non-infectious. Diseases
which are easily transmitted from one person to another, are called
infectious diseases. Infectious diseases are very common and every
one of us suffers from these at sometime or other. Some of the infectious
diseases like AIDS are fatal. Among non-infectious diseases, cancer is the
major cause of death. Drug and alcohol abuse also affect our health adversely.

8.1 COMMON DISEASES IN HUMANS

A wide range of organisms belonging to bacteria, viruses, fungi,
protozoans, helminths, etc., could cause diseases in man. Such disease-
causing organisms are called pathogens. Most parasites are therefore
pathogens as they cause harm to the host by living in (or on) them. The
pathogens can enter our body by various means, multiply and interfere
with normal vital activities, resulting in morphological and functional
damage. Pathogens have to adapt to life within the environment of the
host. For example, the pathogens that enter the gut must know a way of
survian in the stomach at low pH and resisting the various digestive
enzymes. A few representative members from different groups of
pathogenic organisms are discussed here alongwith the diseases caused
by them. Preventive and control measures against these diseases in general,
are also brieﬂy described.

Salmonella typhi is a pathogenic bacterium which causes typhoid
fever in human beings. These pathogens generally enter the small intestine
through food and water contaminated with them and migrate to other
organs through blood. Sustained high fever (39° to 40°C), weakness,
stomach pain, constipation, headache and loss of appetite are some of
the common symptoms of this disease. Intestinal perforation and death
may occur in severe cases. Typhoid fever could be confirmed by

2019-2020