BIOMOLECULES

Plant cell walls are made of cellulose. Paper made from plant pulp
and cotton ﬁbre is cellulosic. There are more complex polysaccharides
in nature. They have as building blocks, amino-sugars and chemically
modified sugars (e. g., glucosamine, N-acetyl galactosamine, etc.).
Exoskeletons of arthropods, for example, have a complex
polysaccharide called chitin. These complex polysaccharides are mostly
homopolymers.

9.6 NUCLEIC ACIDS

The other type of macromolecule that one would find in the acid
insoluble fraction of any living tissue is the nucleic acid. These are
polynucleotides. Together with polysaccharides and polypeptides these
comprise the true macromolecular fraction of any living tissue or cell.
For nucleic acids, the building block is a nucleotide. A nucleotide has
three chemically distinct components. One is a heterocyclic compound,
the second is a monosaccharide and the third a phosphoric acid or
phosphate.

As you notice in Figure 9.1, the heterocyclic compounds in nucleic
acids are the nitrogenous bases named adenine, guanine, uracil,
cytosine, and thymine. Adenine and Guanine are substituted purines
while the rest are substituted pyrimidines. The skeletal heterocyclic ring
is called as purine and pyrimidine respectively. The sugar found in
polynucleotides is either ribose (a monosaccharide pentose) or 2’
deoxyribose. A nucleic acid containing deoxyribose is called
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) while that which contains ribose is called
ribonucleic acid (RNA).

9.7 STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS

Proteins, as mentioned earlier, are heteropolymers containing strings
of amino acids. Structure of molecules means different things in
different contexts. In inorganic chemistry, the structure invariably
refers to the molecular formulae (e.g., NaCl, MgClZ, etc.). Organic
chemists always write a two dimensional view of the molecules while
representing the structure of the molecules (e.g., benzene,
naphthalene, etc.). Physicists conjure up the three dimensional views
of molecular structures while biologists describe the protein structure
at four levels. The sequence of amino acids i.e., the positional
information in a protein — which is the first amino acid, which is
second, and so on — is called the primary structure (Figure 9.3) of a
protein. A protein is imagined as a line, the left end represented by
the first amino acid and the right end represented by the last amino

149