LOCOMOT ION AND MOVEMENT

 

Some specialised cells in our body like macrophages and leucocytes
in blood exhibit amoeboid movement. It is effected by pseudopodia formed
by the streaming of protoplasm (as in Amoeba). Cytoskeletal elements
like microﬁlaments are also involved in amoeboid movement.

Ciliary movement occurs in most of our internal tubular organs which
are lined by ciliated epithelium. The coordinated movements of cilia in
the trachea help us in removing dust particles and some of the foreign
substances inhaled alongwith the atmospheric air. Passage of ova through
the female reproductive tract is also facilitated by the ciliary movement.

Movement of our limbs, jaws, tongue, etc, require muscular movement.
The contractile property of muscles are effectively used for locomotion
and other movements by human beings and majority of multicellular
organisms. Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular,
skeletal and neural systems. In this chapter, you will learn about the
types of muscles, their structure, mechanism of their contraction and
important aspects of the skeletal system.

20.2 MUSCLE

You have studied in Chapter 8 that the cilia and ﬂagella are the outgrowths
of the cell membrane. Flagellar movement helps in the swimming of
spermatozoa, maintenance of water current in the canal system of sponges
and in locomotion of Protozoans like Euglena. Muscle is a specialised
tissue of mesodermal origin. About 40-50 per cent of the body
weight of a human adult is contributed by muscles. They have
special properties like excitability, contractility, extensibility and
elasticity. Muscles have been classified using different criteria,
namely location, appearance and nature of regulation of their
activities. Based on their location, three types of muscles are
identified : (i) Skeletal (ii) Visceral and (iii) Cardiac.

Skeletal muscles are closely associated with the skeletal components
of the body. They have a striped appearance under the microscope and
hence are called striated muscles. As their activities are under the
voluntary control of the nervous system, they are known as voluntary
muscles too. They are primarily involved in locomotory actions and
changes of body postures.

Visceral muscles are located in the inner walls of hollow visceral organs
of the body like the alimentary canal, reproductive tract, etc. They do not
exhibit any striation and are smooth in appearance. Hence, they are called
smooth muscles (nonstriated muscle). Their activities are not under the
voluntary control of the nervous system and are therefore known as
involuntary muscles. ’Ihey assist, for example, in the transportation of food
through the digestive tract and gametes through the genital tract.