Figure 10.5 Fermentation Plant

Figure 10.4 Fermentors

BIOLOGY

10.2. 1 Fermented Beverages

Microbes especially yeasts have been used from
time immemorial for the production of beverages
like wine, beer, whisky, brandy or rum. For this
purpose the same yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae used for bread-making and
commonly called brewer’s yeast, is used for
fermenting malted cereals and fruit juices, to
produce ethanol. Do you recollect the metabolic
reactions, which result in the production of
ethanol by yeast? Depending on the type of the
raw material used for fermentation and the type
of processing (with or Without distillation)
wr—‘M " different types of alcoholic drinks are obtained.
"' Wine and beer are produced without distillation
whereas whisky, brandy and rum are produced
by distillation of the fermented broth. The
photograph of a fermentation plant is shown in
Figure 10.5.

10.2.2 Antibiotics

Antibiotics produced by microbes are regarded
as one of the most signiﬁcant discoveries of the
twentieth century and have greatly contributed
towards the welfare of the human society. Anti is
a Greek word that means ‘against’, and bio means
‘life’, together they mean ‘against life’ (in the
context of disease causing organisms); whereas with reference to human
beings, they are ‘pro life’ and not against. Antibiotics are chemical
substances, which are produced by some microbes and can kill or retard
the growth of other (disease-causing) microbes.

You are familiar with the commonly used antibiotic Penicillin. Do you
know that Penicillin was the ﬁrst antibiotic to be discovered, and it was a
chance discovery? Alexander Fleming while working on Staphylococci
bacteria, once observed a mould growing in one of his unwashed culture
plates around which Staphylococci could not grow. He found out that it
was due to a chemical produced by the mould and he named it Penicillin
after the mould Penicillium notatum. However, its full potential as an
effective antibiotic was established much later by Ernest Chain and
Howard Florey. This antibiotic was extensively used to treat American
soldiers wounded in World War II. Fleming, Chain and Florey were awarded
the Nobel Prize in 1945, for this discovery.

2019-2020