BIOLOGY

 

the egg apparatus consisting of two synergids and an egg cell. At the
chalazal end are three antipodals. At the centre is a large central cell
with two polar nuclei.

Pollination is the mechanism to transfer pollen grains from the
anther to the stigma. Pollinating agents are either abiotic (wind and
water) or biotic (animals).

Pollen-pistil interaction involves all events from the landing of pollen
grains on the stigma until the pollen tube enters the embryo sac (when
the pollen is compatible) or pollen inhibition (when the pollen is
incompatible). Following compatible pollination, pollen grain germinates
on the stigma and the resulting pollen tube grow through the style,
enter the ovules and ﬁnally discharges two male gametes in one of the
synergids. Angiosperms exhibit double fertilisation because two fusion
events occur in each embryo sac, namely syngamy and triple fusion.
The products of these fusions are the diploid zygote and the triploid
primary endosperm nucleus (in the primary endosperm cell). Zygote
develops into the embryo and the primary endosperm cell forms the
endosperm tissue. Formation of endosperm always precedes
development of the embryo.

The developing embryo passes through different stages such as
the proembryo, globular and heart-shaped stages before maturation.
Mature dicotyledonous embryo has two cotyledons and an embryonal
axis with epicotyl and hypocotyl. Embryos of monocotyledons have a
single cotyledon. After fertilisation, ovary develops into fruit and ovules
develop into seeds.

A phenomenon called apomixis is found in some angiosperms,
particularly in grasses. It results in the formation of seeds without
fertilisation. Apomicts have several advantages in horticulture and
agriculture.

Some angiosperms produce more than one embryo in their seed.

This phenomenon is called polyembryony.

 

 

 

 

 

 

l/AMA

EXERCISES

1. Name the parts of an angiosperm ﬂower in which development of male
and female gametophyte take place.

2. Differentiate between microsporogenesis and megasporogenesis. Which
type of cell division occurs during these events? Name the structures
formed at the end of these two events.

3. Arrange the following terms in the correct developmental sequence:

Pollen grain, sporogenous tissue, microspore tetrad, pollen mother cell,
male gametes.

4. With a neat, labelled diagram, describe the parts of a typical angiosperm
ovule.

5. What is meant by monosporic development of female gametophyte?

6. With a neat diagram explain the 7 -celled, 8-nucleate nature of the female
gametophyte.

2019-2020