Figure 10.6 Secondary treatment

BIOLOGY

heterotrophic microbes naturally present in
the sewage. This treatment is carried out in
two stages:

Primary treatment : These treatment
steps basically involve physical removal of
particles — large and small — from the sewage
through ﬁltration and sedimentation. These
are removed in stages; initially, ﬂoating debris
is removed by sequential ﬁltration. Then the
grit (soil and small pebbles) are removed by
sedimentation. All solids that settle form the
primary sludge, and the supernatant forms
the efﬂuent. The efﬂuent from the primary
settling tank is taken for secondary treatment.

Secondary treatment or Biological treatment : The primary
efﬂuent is passed into large aeration tanks (Figure 10.6) where it is
constantly agitated mechanically and air is pumped into it. This allows
vigorous growth of useful aerobic microbes into ﬂocs (masses of
bacteria associated with fungal filaments to form mesh like
structures). While growing, these microbes consume the major part
of the organic matter in the efﬂuent. This significantly reduces the
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of the efﬂuent. BOD refers to
the amount of the oxygen that would be consumed if all the organic
matter in one liter of water were oxidised by bacteria. The sewage
water is treated till the BOD is reduced. The BOD test measures the
rate of uptake of oxygen by micro-organisms in a sample of water
and thus, indirectly, BOD is a measure of the organic matter present
in the water. The greater the BOD of waste water, more is its polluting
potential.

Once the BOD of sewage or waste water is reduced significantly, the
efﬂuent is then passed into a settling tank where the bacterial ‘ﬂocs’ are
allowed to sediment. This sediment is called activated sludge. A small
part of the activated sludge is pumped back into the aeration tank to
serve as the inoculum. The remaining major part of the sludge is pumped
into large tanks called anaerobic sludge digesters. Here, other kinds
of bacteria, which grow anaerobically, digest the bacteria and the fungi
in the sludge. During this digestion, bacteria produce a mixture of gases
such as methane, hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide. These gases
form biogas and can be used as source of energy as it is inﬂammable.

The efﬂuent from the secondary treatment plant is generally released
into natural water bodies like rivers and streams. An aerial view of such
a plant is shown in Figure 10.7.

2019-2020