DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

blood. They are first incorporated into small droplets called micelles which
move into the intestinal mucosa. They are re-formed into very small protein
coated fat globules called the chylomicrons which are transported into
the lymph vessels (lacteals) in the villi. These lymph vessels ultimately
release the absorbed substances into the blood stream.

Absorption of substances takes place in different parts of the alimentary
canal, like mouth, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. However,
maximum absorption occurs in the small intestine. A summary of absorption
(sites of absorption and substances absorbed) is given in Table 16.1.

265

TABLE 16.1 The Summary of Absorption in Different Parts of Digestive System

Mouth Stomach Small Intestine

Certain drugs Absorption of Principal organ for absorption
coming in contact water, simple of nutrients. The digestion is
with the mucosa sugars, and completed here and the final
of mouth and alcohol etc. products of digestion such as
lower side of the takes place. glucose, fructose, fatty acids,
tongue are glycerol and amino acids are
absorbed into the absorbed through the mucosa
blood capillaries into the blood stream and
lining them. lymph.

The absorbed substances ﬁnally reach the tissues which utilise them
for their activities. This process is called assimilation.

The digestive wastes, solidified into coherent faeces in the rectum
initiate a neural reﬂex causing an urge or desire for its removal. The
egestion of faeces to the outside through the anal opening (defaecation) is
a voluntary process and is carried out by a mass peristaltic movement.

16.4 DISORDERS 0F DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

The inﬂammation of the intestinal tract is the most common ailment due
to bacterial or viral infections. The infections are also caused by the
parasites of the intestine like tapeworm, roundworm, threadworm,
hookworm, pin worm, etc.

Jaundice: The liver is affected, skin and eyes turn yellow due to the
deposit of bile pigments.

Vomiting: It is the ejection of stomach contents through the mouth. This
reﬂex action is controlled by the vomit centre in the medulla. A feeling of
nausea precedes vomiting.

Diarrhoea: The abnormal frequency of bowel movement and increased
liquidity of the faecal discharge is known as diarrhoea. It reduces the
absorption of food.

Constipation: In constipation, the faeces are retained within the colon
as the bowel movements occur irregularly.

Indigestion: In this condition, the food is not properly digested leading to
a feeling of fullness. The causes of indigestion are inadequate enzyme
secretion, anxiety, food poisoning, over eating, and spicy food.

2019-2020

Large Intestine

Absorption of
water, some
minerals and
drugs takes
place.