ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

Hospitals generate hazardous wastes that contain disinfectants and
other harmful chemicals, and also pathogenic micro-organisms. Such
wastes also require careful treatment and disposal. The use of incinerators
is crucial to disposal of hospital waste.

Irreparable computers and other electronic goods are known as
electronic wastes (e-wastes). E-wastes are burried in landﬁlls or
incinerated. Over half of the e-wastes generated in the developed world
are exported to developing countries, mainly to China, India and Pakistan,
where metals like copper, iron, silicon, nickel and gold are recovered
during recycling process. Unlike developed countries, which have
speciﬁcally built facilities for recycling of e-wastes, recycling in developing
countries often involves manual participation thus exposing workers to
toxic substances present in e-wastes. Recycling is the only solution for
the treatment of e-waste, provided it is carried out in an environment-
friendly manner.

16.3. 1 Case Study of Remedy for Plastic Waste

A plastic sack manufacturer in Bangalore has managed to ﬁnd the ideal
solution to the ever-increasing problem of accumulating plastic waste.
Ahmed Khan, aged 57 years old, has been producing plastic sacks for
20 years. About 8 years ago, he realised that plastic waste was a real
problem. Polyblend, a ﬁne powder of recycled modiﬁed plastic, was
developed then by his company. This mixture is mixed with the bitumen
that is used to lay roads. In collaboration with R.V. College of Engineering
and the Bangalore City Corporation, Ahmed Khan proved that blends of
Polyblend and bitumen, when used to lay roads, enhanced the bitumen’s
water repellant properties, and helped to increase road life by a factor of
three. The raw material for creating Polyblend is any plastic ﬁlm waste.
So, against the price of Rs. 0.40 per kg that rag pickers had been getting
for plastic waste, Khan now offers Rs.6. Using Khan’s technique, by the
year 2002, more than 40 kms of road in Bangalore has already been
laid. At this rate, Khan will soon be running short of plastic waste in
Bangalore, to produce Polyblend. Thanks to innovations like Polyblend,
we might still avoid being smothered by plastic waste.

16.4 AGRO-CHEMICALS AND THEIR EFFECTS

In the wake of green revolution, use of inorganic fertilisers and pesticides
has increased manifold for enhancing crop production. Pesticides,
herbicides, fungicides, etc., are being increasingly used. These incidentally,
are also toxic to non-target organisms,that are important components of
the soil ecosystem. Do you think these can be biomagniﬁed in the terrestrial
ecosystems? We know what the addition of increasing amounts of
chemical fertilisers can do to aquatic ecosystems vis-a-vis eutrophication.
The current problems in agriculture are, therefore, extremely grave.

2019—2020

279