REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

 

 

 

 

SUMMARY

Reproductive health refers to a total well-being in all aspects of
reproduction, i.e., physical, emotional, behavioural and social. Our
nation was the first nation in the world to initiate various action plans
at national level towards attaining a reproductively healthy society.

Counselling and creating awareness among people about
reproductive organs, adolescence and associated changes, safe and
hygienic sexual practices, sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
including AIDS, etc., is the primary step towards reproductive health.
Providing medical facilities and care to the problems like menstrual
irregularities, pregnancy related aspects, delivery, medical termination
of pregnancy, STIs, birth control, infertility, post natal child and
maternal management is another important aspect of the Reproductive
and Child Health Care programmes.

An overall improvement in reproductive health has taken place in
our country as indicated by reduced maternal and infant mortality
rates, early detection and cure of STIs, assistance to infertile couples,
etc. Improved health facilities and better living conditions promoted an
explosive growth of population. Such a growth necessitated intense
propagation of contraceptive methods. Various contraceptive options
are available now such as natural, traditional, barrier, IUDs, pills,
injectables, implants and surgical methods. Though contraceptives are
not regular requirements for reproductive health, one is forced to use
them to avoid pregnancy or to delay or space pregnancy.

Medical termination of pregnancy is legalised in our country. MTP is
generally performed to get rid of unwanted pregnancy due to rapes, casual
relationship, etc., as also in cases when the continuation of pregnancy
could be harmful or even fatal to either the mother, or the foetus or both.

Infections or diseases transmitted through sexual intercourse are
called Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STIs). Pelvic Inﬂammatory
Diseases (PIDs), still birth, infertility are some of the complications of
them. Early detection facilitate better cure of these diseases. Avoiding
sexual intercourse with unknown/multiple partners, use of condoms
during coitus are some of the simple precautions to avoid contracting
STIs.

Inability to conceive or produce children even after 2 years of
unprotected sexual cohabitation is called infertility. Various methods
are now available to help such couples. In Vitro fertilisation followed by
transfer of embryo into the female genital tract is one such method and
is commonly known as the Test Tube Baby’ Programme.

 

 

 

 

2019—2020

 

\\V/IW