BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES

The following are the features that are required to facilitate cloning
into a vector.

(i) Origin of replication (ori) : This is a sequence from where
replication starts and any piece of DNA when linked to this sequence
can be made to replicate within the host cells. This sequence is also
responsible for controlling the copy number of the linked DNA. So,
if one wants to recover many copies of the target DNA it should be
cloned in a vector whose origin support high copy number.

(ii) Selectable marker : In addition to ‘ori’, the vector requires a
selectable marker, which helps in identifying and eliminating non-
transformants and selectively permitting the growth of the
transformants. Transformation is a procedure through which a
piece of DNA is introduced in a host bacterium [you will study the
process in subsequent section). Normally, the genes encoding
resistance to antibiotics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol,
tetracycline or kanamycin, etc., are considered useful selectable
markers for E. coli. The normal E. coli cells do not carry resistance
against any of these antibiotics.

(iii) Cloning sites: In order to link the EcoRI 01a 1 Hind 1“
alien DNA, the vector needs to have
very few, preferably single,
recognition sites for the commonly
used restriction enzymes. Presence of
more than one recognition sites within
the vector will generate several
fragments, which will complicate the
gene cloning (Figure 1 1.4). The
ligation of alien DNA is carried out at
a restriction site present in one of the
two antibiotic resistance genes. For Pvu II
example, you can ligate a foreign DNA
at the BamH I site of tetracycline

      

Figure 11.4 E. coli cloning vector pBR322
showing restriction sites

resistance gene in the vector pBR322. (Hind III, EcoR I, BamH I, Sal I,
The recombinant plasmids will lose Pvu II, Pst I, Cla I), ori and
tetracycline resistance due to insertion antibiotic resistance genes
of foreign DNAbut can still be selected (ampR and tetR)' rop COdeS for

the proteins involved in the

out from non-recombinant ones by replication of the plasmid.

plating the transformants on

tetracycline containing medium. The transformants growing on _
ampicillin containing medium are then transferred on a medium

containing tetracycline. The recombinants will grow in ampicillin —
containing medium but not on that containing tetracycline. But,

non- recombinants will grow on the medium containing both the

antibiotics. In this case, one antibiotic resistance gene helps in
selecting the transformants, whereas the other antibiotic resistance

2019—2020