ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

is detrimental to the other species (host and prey, respectively).
The interaction where one species is beneﬁtted and the other is neither
beneﬁtted nor harmed is called commensalism. In amensalism on
the other hand one species is harmed whereas the other is
unaffected. Predation, parasitism and commensalism share a common
characteristic— the interacting species live closely together.

(i) Predation: What would happen to all the energy fixed by

autotrophic organisms if the community has no animals to eat the
plants? You can think of predation as nature’s way of transferring
to higher trophic levels the energy ﬁxed by plants. When we think
of predator and prey, most probably it is the tiger and the deer that
readily come to our mind, but a sparrow eating any seed is no less
a predator. Although animals eating plants are categorised
separately as herbivores, they are, in a broad ecological context,
not very different from predators.

Besides acting as ‘conduits’ for energy transfer across trophic
levels, predators play other important roles. They keep prey
populations under control. But for predators, prey species could
achieve very high population densities and cause ecosystem
instability. When certain exotic species are introduced into a
geographical area, they become invasive and start spreading fast
because the invaded land does not have its natural predators. The
prickly pear cactus introduced into Australia in the early 1920’s
caused havoc by spreading rapidly into millions of hectares of
rangeland. Finally, the invasive cactus was brought under control
only after a cactus-feeding predator (a moth) from its natural habitat
was introduced into the country. Biological control methods adopted
in agricultural pest control are based on the ability of the predator
to regulate prey population. Predators also help in maintaining
species diversity in a community, by reducing the intensity of
competition among competing prey species. In the rocky intertidal
communities of the American Paciﬁc Coast the starﬁsh Pisaster is
an important predator. In a ﬁeld experiment, when all the starﬁsh
were removed from an enclosed intertidal area, more than 10 species
of invertebrates became extinct within a year, because of inter-
speciﬁc competition.

If a predator is too efﬁcient and overexploits its prey, then the
prey might become extinct and following it, the predator will also
become extinct for lack of food. This is the reason why predators in
nature are ‘prudent’. Prey species have evolved various defenses to
lessen the impact of predation. Some species of insects and frogs
are cryptically—coloured (camouﬂaged) to avoid being detected easily
by the predator. Some are poisonous and therefore avoided by the

2019—2020

   

233