THE LIVING WORLD

providing scientiﬁc names better. The scientiﬁc name of mango is written
as Mangifera indica. Let us see how it is a binomial name. In this name
Mangifera represents the genus while indica, is a particular species, or a
speciﬁc epithet. Other universal rules of nomenclature are as follows:

1. Biological names are generally in Latin and written in italics.
They are Latinised or derived from Latin irrespective of their
origin.

2. The ﬁrst word in a biological name represents the genus while
the second component denotes the speciﬁc epithet.

3. Both the words in a biological name, when handwritten, are
separately underlined, or printed in italics to indicate their Latin
origin.

4. The ﬁrst word denoting the genus starts with a capital letter

while the speciﬁc epithet starts with a small letter. It can be
illustrated with the example of Mangifera indica.

Name of the author appears after the speciﬁc epithet, i.e., at the end of
the biological name and is written in an abbreviated form, e. g., Mangﬁera
indica Linn. It indicates that this species was ﬁrst described by Linnaeus.

Since it is nearly impossible to study all the living organisms, it is
necessary to devise some means to make this possible. This process is
classiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation is the process by which anything is grouped
into convenient categories based on some easily observable characters.
For example, we easily recognise groups such as plants or animals or
dogs, cats or insects. The moment we use any of these terms, we associate
certain characters with the organism in that group. What image do you
see when you think of a dog ? Obviously, each one of us will see ‘dogs’
and not ‘cats’. Now, if we were to think of ‘Alsatians’ we know what we are
talking about. Similarly, suppose we were to say ‘mammals’, you would,
of course, think of animals with external ears and body hair. Likewise, in
plants, if we try to talk of ‘Wheat’, the picture in each of our minds will be
of wheat plants, not of rice or any other plant. Hence, all these - ‘Dogs’,
‘Cats’, ‘Mammals’, ‘Wheat’, ‘Rice’, ‘Plants’, ‘Animals’, etc., are convenient
categories we use to study organisms. The scientiﬁc term for these
categories is taxa. Here you must recognise that taxa can indicate
categories at very different levels. ‘Plants’ — also form a taxa. ‘Wheat’ is
also a taxa. Similarly, ‘animals’, ‘mammals’, ‘dogs’ are all taxa — but you
know that a dog is a mammal and mammals are animals. Therefore,
‘animals’, ‘mammals’ and ‘dogs’ represent taxa at different levels.

Hence, based on characteristics, all living organisms can be classiﬁed
into different taxa. This process of classiﬁcation is taxonomy. External
and internal structure, along with the structure of cell, development