262

 

BIOLOGY

amylase. About 30 per cent of starch is hydrolysed here by this enzyme
(optimum pH 6.8) into a disaccharide — maltose. Lysozyme present in
saliva acts as an antibacterial agent that prevents infections.

The mucosa of stomach has gastric glands. Gastric glands have three
major types of cells namely -
(i) mucus neck cells which secrete mucus;
(ii) peptic or chief cells which secrete the proenzyme pepsinogen; and
(iii) parietal or oxyntic cells which secrete HCl and intrinsic factor
(factor essential for absorption of vitamin B12).

 
 
 

,—

y ‘7’ .v , f: .2 ‘ ‘l ‘ z.. z .‘
{Swimsus—r-Ee- , , , .
. ’7-0 .1_

 

The stomach stores the food for 4-5 hours. The food mixes thoroughly
with the acidic gastric juice of the stomach by the churning movements
of its muscular wall and is called the chyme. ’Ihe proenzyme pepsinogen,
on exposure to hydrochloric acid gets converted into the active enzyme
pepsin, the proteolytic enzyme of the stomach. Pepsin converts proteins
into proteoses and peptones (peptides). The mucus and bicarbonates
present in the gastric juice play an important role in lubrication and
protection of the mucosal epithelium from excoriation by the highly
concentrated hydrochloric acid. HCl provides the acidic pH (pH 1.8)
optimal for pepsins. Rennin is a proteolytic enzyme found in gastric juice
of infants which helps in the digestion of milk proteins. Small amounts of
lipases are also secreted by gastric glands.

Various types of movements are generated by the muscularis layer of
the small intestine. These movements help in a thorough mixing up of
the food with various secretions in the intestine and thereby facilitate
digestion. The bile, pancreatic juice and the intestinal juice are the
secretions released into the small intestine. Pancreatic juice and bile are
released through the hepato-pancreatic duct. The pancreatic juice
contains inactive enzymes — trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen,
procarboxypeptidases, amylases, lipases and nucleases. Trypsinogen is
activated by an enzyme, enterokinase, secreted by the intestinal mucosa
into active trypsin, which in turn activates the other enzymes in the
pancreatic juice. The bile released into the duodenum contains bile
pigments (bilirubin and bili-verdin), bile salts, cholesterol and
phospholipids but no enzymes. Bile helps in emulsiﬁcation of fats, i.e.,
breaking down of the fats into very small micelles. Bile also activates lipases.

The intestinal mucosal epithelium has goblet cells which secrete
mucus. The secretions of the brush border cells of the mucosa alongwith
the secretions of the goblet cells constitute the intestinal juice or
succus entericus. This juice contains a variety of enzymes like
disaccharidases (e. g., maltase), dipeptidases, lipases, nucleosidases, etc.
The mucus alongwith the bicarbonates from the pancreas protects the
intestinal mucosa from acid as well as provide an alkaline medium (pH
7 .8) for enzymatic activities. Sub-mucosal glands (Brunner’s glands) also
help in this.