HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE

and food products, thereby contaminating them.
Drinking water and food contaminated by the faecal
matter are the main source of infection.

Ascaris, the common round worm and Wuchereria,
the ﬁlarial worm, are some of the helminths which are
known to be pathogenic to man. Ascaris, an intestinal
parasite causes ascariasis. Symptoms of these disease
include internal bleeding, muscular pain, fever, anemia
and blockage of the intestinal passage. The eggs of the
parasite are excreted along with the faeces of infected
persons which contaminate soil, water, plants, etc. A
healthy person acquires this infection through
contaminated water, vegetables, fruits, etc.

Wuchereria (W. bancrofti and W. malayi), the ﬁlarial
worms cause a slowly developing chronic inﬂammation
of the organs in which they live for many years, usually
the lymphatic vessels of the lower limbs and the disease
is called elephantiasis or filariasis (Figure 8.2). The
genital organs are also often affected, resulting in gross
deformities. The pathogens are transmitted to a healthy Figure 8.2 Diagram showing
person through the bite by the female mosquito vectors. inﬂammation in one

Many fungi belonging to the genera Microsporum, 0f the lower.hn_1bs due
Trichophy ton and Epidermophy ton are to elephanuaSIS
responsible for ringworms which is one of
the most common infectious diseases in man.
Appearance of dry, scaly lesions on various
parts of the body such as skin, nails and
scalp (Figure 8.3) are the main symptoms of
the disease. These lesions are accompanied
by intense itching. Heat and moisture help
these fungi to grow, which makes them thrive
in skin folds such as those in the groin or
between the toes. Ringworms are generally

 

Figure 8.3 Diagram showing ringworm
acquired from soil or by using towels, clothes affected area of the skin

or even the comb of infected individuals.

Maintenance of personal and public hygiene is very important for
prevention and control of many infectious diseases. Measures for personal
hygiene include keeping the body clean; consumption of clean drinking
water, food, vegetables, fruits, etc. Public hygiene includes proper disposal
of waste and excreta; periodic cleaning and disinfection of water reservoirs,
pools, cesspools and tanks and observing standard practices of hygiene —
in public catering. These measures are particularly essential where the
infectious agents are transmitted through food and water such as typhoid,

amoebiasis and ascariasis. In cases of air-borne diseases such as
pneumonia and common cold, in addition to the above measures, close

2019-2020