EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

 

composition as that of plasma except the nitrogenous wastes. The porous
cellophane membrance of the tube allows the passage of molecules based
on concentration gradient. As nitrogenous wastes are absent in the
dialysing ﬂuid, these substances freely move out, thereby clearing the
blood. The cleared blood is pumped back to the body through a vein
after adding anti-heparin to it. This method is a boon for thousands of
uremic patients all over the world.

Kidney transplantation is the ultimate method in the correction of
acute renal failures (kidney failure). A functioning kidney is used in
transplantation from a donor, preferably a close relative, to minimise its
chances of rejection by the immune system of the host. Modern clinical
procedures have increased the success rate of such a complicated
technique.

Renal calculi: Stone or insoluble mass of crystallised salts (oxalates,
etc.) formed within the kidney.

Glomerulonephritis: Inﬂammation of glomeruli of kidney.

SUMMARY

Many nitrogen containing substances, ions, C02, water, etc. that accumulate in
the body have to be eliminated. Nature of nitrogenous wastes formed and their
excretion vary among animals, mainly dependlng on the habitat (availability of
water). Ammonia, urea and E‘uric aCIdkare the major nitrogenous wastes excreted

Protonephndia,nephi;1d1a ma1p1gh1a1‘1 tubules, green glands and the kidneys are
the common excretory organs inq.m z _ ‘
but also help In the maintenandéof io‘. 'c and acid- base balance of body ﬂuids.

In humans, the excretorysystem consists of one pair of lddneys, a pair of ureters,
a urinary bladder and a urethra Each kidney has over a million tubular structures
called nephrons. Nephron Is the functional unit of kidney and has two portions —
glomerulus and renal tubule. Glomerulus' 1s a tuft of capillaries formed from afferent
arterioles, ﬁne branches of renal artery. The renal tubule starts with a double walled
Bowman’s capsulagand is further differentiated into a proximal convoluted tubule
(PCT), Henle’ s l‘é’dp (HL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
nephrons Join to a common collecting duct many of Wthh ultimately open into the
renal pelvis through the medullary pyramids. The Bowman’s capsule encloses the
glomerulus to form Malpighian or renal corpuscle.

Urine formation involves three main processes, i.e., ﬁltration, reabsorption and
secretion. Filtration is a non-selective process performed by the glomerulus using
the glomerular capillary blood pressure. About 1200 ml of blood is ﬁltered by the

glomerulus per minute to form 125 ml of ﬁltrate in the Bowman’s capsule per