252

 

BIOLOGY

known that not only the duration of light period but that the duration of
dark period is also of equal importance. Hence, it can be said that ﬂowering
in certain plants depends not only on a combination of light and dark
exposures but also their relative durations. This response of plants to
periods of day/ night is termed photoperiodism. It is also interesting to
note that while shoot apices modify themselves into ﬂowering apices prior
to ﬂowering, they (i.e., shoot apices of plants) by themselves cannot percieve
photoperiods. The site of perception of light/ dark duration are the leaves.
It has been hypothesised that there is a hormonal substance(s) that is
responsible for ﬂowering. This hormonal substance migrates from leaves
to shoot apices for inducing ﬂowering only when the plants are exposed
to the necessary inductive photoperiod.

l 5.6 VERNALISATION

There are plants for which ﬂowering is either quantitatively or qualitatively
dependent on exposure to low temperature. This phenomenon is termed
vernalisation. It prevents precocious reproductive development late in
the growing season, and enables the plant to have sufficient time to reach
maturity. Vernalisation refers specially to the promotion of ﬂowering by a
period of low temperature. Some important food plants, wheat, barley,
rye have two kinds of varieties: winter and spring varieties. The ‘spring’
variety are normally planted in the spring and come to ﬂower and produce
grain before the end of the growing season. Winter varieties, however, if
planted in spring would normally fail to ﬂower or produce mature grain
within a span of a ﬂowering season. Hence, they are planted in autumn.
They germinate, and over winter come out as small seedlings, resume
growth in the spring, and are harvested usually around mid-summer.

Another example of vernalisation is seen in biennial plants. Biennials
are monocarpic plants that normally ﬂower and die in the second season.
Sugarbeet, cabbages, carrots are some of the common biennials.
Subjecting the growing of a biennial plant to a cold treatment stimulates
a subsequent photoperiodic ﬂowering response.

15.7 SEED DORMANCY

There are certain seeds which fail to germinate even when external
conditions are favourable. Such seeds are understood to be undergoing
a period of dormancy which is controlled not by external environment
but are under endogenous control or conditions within the seed itself.
Impermeable and hard seed coat; presence of chemical inhibitors such
as abscissic acids, phenolic acids, para-ascorbic acid; and immature