BIOLOGY

 

 

 

SUMMARY

Nucleic acids are long polymers of nucleotides. While DNA stores genetic
information, RNA mostly helps in transfer and expression of information.
Though DNA and RNA both function as genetic material, but DNA being
chemically and structurally more stable is a better genetic material.
However, RNA is the first to evolve and DNA was derived from RNA. The
hallmark of the double stranded helical structure of DNA is the hydrogen
bonding between the bases from opposite strands. The rule is that
Adenine pairs with Thymine through two H-bonds, and Guanine with
Cytosine through three H-bonds. This makes one strand
complementary to the other. The DNA replicates semiconservatively,
the process is guided by the complementary H-bonding. A segment of
DNA that codes for RNA may in a simplistic term can be referred as
gene. During transcription also, one of the strands of DNA acts a
template to direct the synthesis of complementary RNA. In bacteria,
the transcribed mRNA is functional, hence can directly be translated.
In eukaryotes, the gene is split. The coding sequences, exons, are
interrupted by non-coding sequences, introns. Introns are removed
and exons are joined to produce functional RNA by splicing. The
messenger RNA contains the base sequences that are read in a
combination of three (to make triplet genetic code) to code for an amino
acid. The genetic code is read again on the principle of complementarity
by tRNA that acts as an adapter molecule. There are speciﬁc tRNAs for
every amino acid. The tRNA binds to speciﬁc amino acid at one end
and pairs through H-bonding with codes on mRNA through its
anticodons. The site of translation (protein synthesis) is ribosomes,
which bind to mRNA and provide platform for joining of amino acids.
One of the rRNA acts as a catalyst for peptide bond formation, which is
an example of RNA enzyme (ribozyme). Translation is a process that
has evolved around RNA, indicating that life began around RNA. Since,
transcription and translation are energetically very expensive
processes, these have to be tightly regulated. Regulation of transcription
is the primary step for regulation of gene expression. In bacteria, more
than one gene is arranged together and regulated in units called as
operons. Lac operon is the prototype operon in bacteria, which codes
for genes responsible for metabolism of lactose. The operon is regulated
by the amount of lactose in the medium where the bacteria are grown.
Therefore, this regulation can also be viewed as regulation of enzyme
synthesis by its substrate.

Human genome project was a mega project that aimed to sequence
every base in human genome. This project has yielded much new
information. Many new areas and avenues have opened up as a
consequence of the project. DNA Fingerprinting is a technique to find
out variations in individuals of a population at DNA level. It works on
the principle of polymorphism in DNA sequences. It has immense
applications in the field of forensic science, genetic biodiversity and
evolutionary biology.

§
:<:

 

 

 

 

 

 

2019-2020