/
)3

P generation

 

Gametes

F1 generation

F2 generation

  
   

o”

Gametes

Phenotypic ratio : red : pink : white

1:2:1

Genotypic ratio : RR : Rr : rr
1 z 2 :1

 

Figure 5.6

Results of monohybrid cross in
the plant Snapdragon, where
one allele is incompletely
dominant over the other allele

 

BIOLOGY

5.2.2. 1 Incomplete Dominance

When experiments on peas were repeated using other
traits in other plants, it was found that sometimes
the F1 had a phenotype that did not resemble either
of the two parents and was in between the two. The
inheritance of ﬂower colour in the dog ﬂower
(snapdragon or Antirrhinum sp.) is a good example
to understand incomplete dominance. In a cross
between true-breeding red-ﬂowered (RR) and true-
breeding white-ﬂowered plants (rr), the F1 (Rr) was
pink (Figure 5.6). When the F1 was self-pollinated
the F2 resulted in the following ratio 1 (RR) Red : 2
(Rr) Pink: 1 (rr) White. Here the genotype ratios were
exactly as we would expect in any mendelian
monohybrid cross, but the phenotype ratios had
changed from the 3: 1 dominant : recessive ratio.
What happened was that R was not completely
dominant over 1' and this made it possible to
distinguish Rr as pink from RR (red) and rr (white) .

Explanation of the concept of dominance:
What exactly is dominance? Why are some alleles
dominant and some recessive? To tackle these
questions, we must understand what a gene does.
Every gene, as you know by now, contains the
information to express a particular trait. In a
diploid organism, there are two copies of each
gene, i.e., as a pair of alleles. Now, these two alleles
need not always be identical, as in a heterozygote.
One of them may be different due to some changes
that it has undergone (about which you will read
further on, and in the next chapter) which modiﬁes
the information that particular allele contains.
Let’s take an example of a gene that contains
the information for producing an enzyme. Now
there are two copies of this gene, the two allelic
forms. Let us assume (as is more common) that
the normal allele produces the normal enzyme
that is needed for the transformation of a

substrate S. Theoretically, the modiﬁed allele could be responsible for

production of —

(i) the normal/ less efﬁcient enzyme, or

(ii) a non-functional enzyme, or
(iii) no enzyme at all

2019-2020