152

 

BIOLOGY

There are two hydrogen bonds between A and T and three hydrogen
bonds between G and C. Each strand appears like a helical staircase.
Each step of ascent is represented by a pair of bases. At each step of
ascent, the strand turns 36°. One full turn of the helical strand would
involve ten steps or ten base pairs. Attempt drawing a line diagram.
The pitch would be 34A. The rise per base pair would be 3.4A. This
form Of DNA with the above mentioned salient features is called B-
DNA. In higher classes, you will be told that there are more than a
dozen forms of DNA named after English alphabets with unique
structural features.

9.9 DYNAMIC STATE OF BODY CONSTITUENTS - CONCEPT OF
METABOLISM

What we have learnt till now is that living organisms, be it a simple bacterial
cell, a protozoan, a plant or an animal, contain thousands of organic
compounds. These compounds or biomolecules are present in certain
concentrations (expressed as mols / cell or mols / litre etc.). One of the greatest
discoveries ever made was the observation that all these biomolecules have
a turn over. This means that they are constantly being changed into some
other biomolecules and also made from some other biomolecules. This
breaking and making is through chemical reactions constantly occuring
in living organisms. Together all these chemical reactions are called
metabolism. Each of the metabolic reactions results in the transformation
Of biomolecules. A few examples for such metabolic transformations are:
removal of CO2 from amino acids making an amino acid into an amine,
removal of amino group in a nucleotide base; hydrolysis of a glycosidic
bond in a disaccharide, etc. We can list tens and thousands of such
examples. Majority of these metabolic reactions do not occur in isolation
but are always linked to some other reactions. In other words, metabolites
are converted into each other in a series of linked reactions called metabolic
pathways. These metabolic pathways are similar to the automobile trafﬁc
in a city. These pathways are either linear or circular. These pathways criss-
cross each other, i.e., there are trafﬁc junctions. Flow of metabolites through
metabolic pathway has a deﬁnite rate and direction like automobile traffic.
This metabolite ﬂow is called the dynamic state of body constituents. What
is most important is that this interlinked metabolic trafﬁc is very smooth
and without a single reported mishap for healthy conditions. Another feature
of these metabolic reactions is that every chemical reaction is a catalysed
reaction. There is no uncatalysed metabolic conversion in living systems.
Even CO2 dissolving in water, a physical process, is a catalysed reaction in
living systems. The catalysts which hasten the rate of a given metabolic
conversation are also proteins. These proteins with catalytic power are
named enzymes.