BIOLOGY

Smoking also paves the way to hard drugs. Tobacco has been used
by human beings for more than 400 years. It is smoked, chewed or used
as a snuff. Tobacco contains a large number of chemical substances
including nicotine, an alkaloid. Nicotine stimulates adrenal gland to
release adrenaline and nor-adrenaline into blood circulation, both of
which raise blood pressure and increase heart rate. Smoking is associated
with increased incidence of cancers of lung, urinary bladder and throat,
bronchitis, emphysema, coronary heart disease, gastric ulcer, etc. Tobacco
chewing is associated with increased risk of cancer of the oral cavity.
Smoking increases carbon monoxide (CO) content in blood and reduces
the concentration of haembound oxygen. This causes oxygen deﬁciency
in the body.

When one buys packets of cigarettes one cannot miss the statutory
warning that is present on the packing which warns against smoking
and says how it is injurious to health. Yet, smoking is very prevalent in
society, both among young and old. Knowing the dangers of smoking
and chewing tobacco, and its addictive nature, the youth and old need to
avoid these habits. Any addict requires counselling and medical help to
get rid of the habit.

8.5. 1 Adolescence and Drug/Alcohol Abuse

Adolescence means both ‘a period’ and ‘a process’ during which a child
becomes mature in terms of his / her attitudes and beliefs for effective
participation in society. The period between 12- 18 years of age may
be thought of as adolescence period. In other words, adolescence is a
bridge linking childhood and adulthood. Adolescence is accompanied
by several biological and behavioural changes. Adolescence, thus is a
very vulnerable phase of mental and psychological development of an
individual.

Curiosity, need for adventure and excitement, and experimentation,
constitute common causes, which motivate youngsters towards drug
and alcohol use. A child’s natural curiosity motivates him / her to
experiment. This is complicated further by effects that might be perceived
as beneﬁts, of alcohol or drug use. Thus, the first use of drugs or alcohol
may be out of curiosity or experimentation, but later the child starts
using these to escape facing problems. Of late, stress, from pressures to
excel in academics or examinations, has played a significant role in
persuading the youngsters to try alcohol and drugs. The perception
among youth that it is ‘cool’ or progressive to smoke, use drugs or
alcohol, is also in a way a major cause for youth to start these habits.
Television, movies, newspapers, internet also help to promote this
perception. Other factors that have been seen to be associated with drug
and alcohol abuse among adolescents are unstable or unsupportive
family structures and peer pressure.

2019—2020