42

Zygote
/ (2n) N Meiosis

~ ’ Spores
(n)
B
Haplontic
(a)
Gametophyte

(n)

   
  

Gametogenesis

      
    
  
     
     

Sporophyte
(2n)

Diplontic

Sporophyte

/' (2n)
Zygote

Gamtogenesis H aplp ‘

Gametophyte (c)
(n)

BIOLOGY

3.6 PLANT LIFE CYCLES AND ALTERNATION 0F
GENERATIONS

In plants, both haploid and diploid cells can divide by

mitosis. This ability leads to the formation of different

plant bodies - haploid and diploid. The haploid plant
body produces gametes by mitosis. This plant body
represents a gametophyte. Following fertilisation the
zygote also divides by mitosis to produce a diploid
sporophytic plant body. Haploid spores are produced
by this plant body by meiosis. These in turn, divide by
mitosis to form a haploid plant body once again. Thus,
during the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant,
there is an alternation of generations between gamete
producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing
diploid sporophyte.

However, different plant groups, as well as individuals
representing them, differ in the following patterns:

1. Sporophytic generation is represented only by the
one-celled zygote. There are no free-living
sporophytes. Meiosis in the zygote results in the
formation of haploid spores. The haploid spores
divide mitotically and form the gametophyte. The
dominant, photosynthetic phase in such plants is
the free-living gametophyte. This kind of life cycle
is termed as haplontic. Many algae such as Volvox,
Spirogyra and some species of Chlamydomonas
represent this pattern (Figure 3.7 a).

2. On the other extreme, is the type wherein the diploid
sporophyte is the dominant, photosynthetic,
independent phase of the plant. The gametophytic
phase is represented by the single to few-celled
haploid gametophyte. This kind of life cycle is
termed as diplontic. An alga, Fucus sp., represents
this pattern (Fig. 3.7 b). In addition, all seed bearing
plants i.e., gymnosperms and angiosperms, follow
this pattern with some variations, wherein, the
gametophytic phase is few to multi-celled.

3. Bryophytes and pteridophytes, interestingly, exhibit
an intermediate condition (Haplo-diplontic); both

Figure 3.7 Life cycle patterns : (a) Haplontic phases are multicellular. However, they differintheir
dominant phases.

(b) Diplontic (c) Haplo-diplontic