BIOLOGY

of complete nucleotide sequence of human genome during last decade
has set in a new era of genomics. In the last section, the essentials of
human genome sequencing and its consequences will also be discussed.

Let us begin our discussion by ﬁrst understanding the structure of
the most interesting molecule in the living system, that is, the DNA. In
subsequent sections, we will understand that why it is the most abundant
genetic material, and what its relationship is with RNA.

6. 1 THE DNA

DNA is a long polymer of deoxyribonucleotides. The length of DNA is
usually deﬁned as number of nucleotides (or a pair of nucleotide referred
to as base pairs) present in it. This also is the characteristic of an organism.
For example, a bacteriophage known as ch X174 has 5386 nucleotides,
Bacteriophage lambda has 48502 base pairs (bp), Escherichia coli has
4.6 X 106 bp, and haploid content of human DNA is 3.3 X 109 bp. Let us
discuss the structure of such a long polymer.

6. 1. 1 Structure of Polynucleotide Chain

Let us recapitulate the chemical structure of a polynucleotide chain (DNA
or RNA). A nucleotide has three components — a nitrogenous base, a
pentose sugar (ribose in case of RNA, and deoxyribose for DNA), and a
phosphate group. There are two types of nitrogenous bases — Purines
(Adenine and Guanine), and Pyrimidines (Cytosine, Uracil and Thymine).
Cytosine is common for both DNA and RNA and Thymine is present in
DNA. Uracil is present in RNA at the place of Thymine. A nitrogenous
base is linked to the OH of l'C pentose sugar through a N-glycosidic
linkage to form a nucleoside, such as adenosine or deoxyadenosine,
guanosine or deoxyguanosine, cytidine or deoxycytidine and uridine or
deoxythymidine. When a phosphate group is linked to OH of BIG of a
nucleoside through phosphoester linkage, a corresponding nucleotide
(or deoxynucleotide depending upon the type of sugar present) is formed.
Two nucleotides are linked through 3,-5' phosphodiester linkage to form
a dinucleotide. More nucleotides can be joined in such a manner to form
a polynucleotide chain. A polymer thus formed has at one end a free

5’ phosphate

is

  
  

3 ’ hydroxyl

Figure 6.1 A Polynucleotide chain

2019—2020