24

 

BIOLOGY

is branched and septate. The asexual spores are conidia produced
exogenously on the special mycelium called conidiophores. Conidia on
germination produce mycelium. Sexual spores are called ascospores
which are produced endogenously in sac like asci (singular ascus). These
asci are arranged in different types of fruiting bodies called ascocarps.
Some examples are Aspergillus Wigure 2.5b), Claviceps and Neurospora.
Neurospora is used extensively in biochemical and genetic work. Many
members like morels and trufﬂes are edible and are considered delicacies.

2.3.3 Basidiomycetes

Commonly known forms of basidiomycetes are mushrooms, bracket fungi
or puffballs. They grow in soil, on logs and tree stumps and in living
plant bodies as parasites, e. g., rusts and smuts. The mycelium is branched
and septate. The asexual spores are generally not found, but vegetative
reproduction by fragmentation is common. The sex organs are absent,
but plasmogamy is brought about by fusion of two vegetative or somatic
cells of different strains or genotypes. The resultant structure is dikaryotic
which ultimately gives rise to basidium. Karyogamy and meiosis take
place in the basidium producing four basidiospores. The basidiospores
are exogenously produced on the basidium (pl.: basidia). The basidia are
arranged in fruiting bodies called basidiocarps. Some common members
are Agaricus (mushroom) (Figure 2.50), Ustilago (smut) and Puccinia (rust
fungus).

2.3.4 Deuteromycetes

Commonly known as imperfect fungi because only the asexual or
vegetative phases of these fungi are known. When the sexual forms of
these fungi were discovered they were moved into classes they rightly
belong to. It is also possible that the asexual and vegetative stage have
been given one name (and placed under deuteromycetes) and the sexual
stage another (and placed under another class). Later when the linkages
were established, the fungi were correctly identified and moved out of
deuteromycetes. Once perfect (sexual) stages of members of
dueteromycetes were discovered they were often moved to ascomycetes
and basidiomycetes. The deuteromycetes reproduce only by asexual spores
known as conidia. The mycelium is septate and branched. Some members
are saprophytes or parasites while a large number of them are
decomposers of litter and help in mineral cycling. Some examples are
Alternaria, Colletotrichum and Trichoderma.