BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS

Insulin used for diabetes was earlier extracted from
pancreas of slaughtered cattle and pigs. Insulin from an
animal source, though caused some patients to develop
allergy or other types of reactions to the foreign
protein. Insulin consists of two short polypeptide

H

humans, insulin is synthesised as a pro-hormone (like a

‘ A peptide

chains: chain A and chain B, that are linked together by A
disulphide bridges (Figure 12.3). In mammals, including 5 R

$ lnerlin

+ B peptide

pro-enzyme, the pro-hormone also needs to be processed ~.- ,1-

before it becomes a fully mature and functional hormone)
which contains an extra stretch called the C peptide.

Free C peptide

This C peptide is not present in the mature insan and is Figure 12.3 Maturation of
removed during maturation into insulin.The main pro-insulin into insulin
challenge for production of insulin using rDNA techniques (Simp lified)

was getting insulin assembled into a mature form. In

1983, Eli Lilly an American company prepared two DNA sequences
corresponding to A and B, chains of human insulin and introduced them
in plasmids of E. coli to produce insulin chains. Chains A and B were
produced separately, extracted and combined by creating disulﬁde bonds
to form human insulin.

12.2.2 Gene Therapy

If a person is born with a hereditary disease, can a corrective therapy
be taken for such a disease? Gene therapy is an attempt to do this.
Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a
gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/ embryo. Here genes
are inserted into a person’s cells and tissues to treat a disease.
Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into
the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate
for the non-functional gene.

The ﬁrst clinical gene therapy was given in 1990 to a 4-year old girl
with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deﬁciency. This enzyme is crucial for
the immune system to function. The disorder is caused due to the deletion
of the gene for adenosine deaminase. In some children ADA deﬁciency
can be cured by bone marrow transplantation; in others it can be treated
by enzyme replacement therapy, in which functional ADA is given to the
patient by injection. But the problem with both of these approaches that
they are not completely curative. As a ﬁrst step towards gene therapy,
lymphocytes from the blood of the patient are grown in a culture outside
the body. A functional ADA cDNA (using a retroviral vector) is then
introduced into these lymphocytes, which are subsequently returned to
the patient. However, as these cells are not immortal, the patient requires
periodic infusion of such genetically engineered lymphocytes. However, if
the gene isolate from marrow cells producing ADA is introduced into cells
at early embryonic stages, it could be a permanent cure.

2019—2020