324

 

BIOLOGY

itself continues forward to form a pigmented and opaque structure called
the iris which is the visible coloured portion of the eye. The eye ball contains
a transparent crystalline lens which is held in place by ligaments attached
to the ciliary body. In front of the lens, the aperture surrounded by the
iris is called the pupil. The diameter of the pupil is regulated by the muscle
ﬁbres of iris.

The inner layer is the retina and it contains three layers of neural cells —
from inside to outside — ganglion cells, bipolar cells and photoreceptor cells.
There are two types of photoreceptor cells, namely, rods and cones. These
cells contain the light-sensitive proteins called the photopigments. The
daylight (photopic) vision and colour vision are functions of cones and
the twilight (scotopic) vision is the function of the rods. The rods contain
a purplish-red protein called the rhodopsin or visual purple, which
contains a derivative of Vitamin A. In the human eye, there are three types
of cones which possess their own characteristic photopigments that
respond to red, green and blue lights. The sensations of different colours
are produced by various combinations of these cones and their
photopigments. When these cones are stimulated equally, a sensation of
white light is produced.

The optic nerves leave the eye and the retinal blood vessels enter it at
a point medial to and slightly above the posterior pole of the eye ball.
Photoreceptor cells are not present in that region and hence it is called
the blind spot. At the posterior pole of the eye lateral to the blind spot,
there is a yellowish pigmented spot called macula lutea with a central pit
called the fovea. The fovea is a thinned-out portion of the retina where
only the cones are densely packed. It is the point where the visual acuity
(resolution) is the greatest.

The space between the cornea and the lens is called the aqueous
chamber and contains a thin watery ﬂuid called aqueous humor. The
space between the lens and the retina is called the vitreous chamber
and is ﬁlled with a transparent gel called vitreous humor.

21 .6.1 .2 Mechanism of Vision

The light rays in visible wavelength focussed on the retina through the
cornea and lens generate potentials (impulses) in rods and cones. As
mentioned earlier, the photosensitive compounds (photopigments) in the
human eyes is composed of opsin (a protein) and retinal (an aldehyde of
vitamin A). Light induces dissociation of the retinal from opsin resulting
in changes in the structure of the opsin. This causes membrane
permeability changes. As a result, potential differences are generated in
the photoreceptor cells. This produces a signal that generates action
potentials in the ganglion cells through the bipolar cells. These action
potentials (impulses) are transmitted by the optic nerves to the visual