HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE

8.5.2 Addiction and Dependence

Because of the perceived beneﬁts, drugs are frequently used repeatedly.
The most important thing, which one fails to realise, is the inherent
addictive nature of alcohol and drugs. Addiction is a psychological
attachment to certain effects —such as euphoria and a temporary feeling
of well-being —associated with drugs and alcohol. These drive people to
take them even when these are not needed, or even when their use becomes
self-destructive. With repeated use of drugs, the tolerance level of the
receptors present in our body increases. Consequently the receptors
respond only to higher doses of drugs or alcohol leading to greater intake
and addiction. However, it should be clearly borne in mind that use of
these drugs even once, can be a fore-runner to addiction. Thus, the
addictive potential of drugs and alcohol, pull the user into a Vicious circle
leading to their regular use (abuse) from which he / she may not be able
to get out. In the absence of any guidance or counselling, the person gets
addicted and becomes dependent on their use.

Dependence is the tendency of the body to manifest a characteristic
and unpleasant withdrawal syndrome if regular dose of drugs / alcohol
is abruptly discontinued. This is characterised by anxiety, shakiness,
nausea and sweating, which may be relieved when use is resumed again.
In some cases, withdrawal symptoms can be severe and even life
threatening and the person may need medical supervision.

Dependence leads the patient to ignore all social norms in order to
get sufficient funds to satiate his / her needs. These result in many social
adjustment problems.

8.5.3 Effects of Drug/Alcohol Abuse

The immediate adverse effects of drugs and alcohol abuse are manifested
in the form of reckless behaviour, vandalism and violence. Excessive
doses of drugs may lead to coma and death due to respiratory failure,
heart failure or cerebral hemorrhage. A combination of drugs or their
intake along with alcohol generally results in overdosing and even
deaths. The most common warning signs of drug and alcohol abuse
among youth include drop in academic performance, unexplained
absence from school/ college, lack of interest in personal hygiene,
withdrawal, isolation, depression, fatigue, aggressive and rebellious
behaviour, deteriorating relationships with family and friends, loss of
interest in hobbies, change in sleeping and eating habits, ﬂuctuations
in weight, appetite, etc.

There may even be some far-reaching implications of drug/ alcohol
abuse. If an abuser is unable to get money to buy drugs / alcohol he / she
may turn to stealing. The adverse effects are just not restricted to the
person who is using drugs or alcohol. At times, a drug/ alcohol addict
becomes the cause of mental and ﬁnancial distress to his / her entire family
and friends.

2019—2020