126

 

BIOLOGY

Schwann (1 839), a British Zoologist, studied different types of animal cells
and reported that cells had a thin outer layer which is today known as the
‘plasma membrane’. He also concluded, based on his studies on plant
tissues, that the presence of cell wall is a unique character of the plant
cells. On the basis of this, Schwann proposed the hypothesis that the bodies
of animals and plants are composed of cells and products of cells.

Schleiden and Schwann together formulated the cell theory. This theory
however, did not explain as to how new cells were formed. Rudolf Virchow
(1855) ﬁrst explained that cells divided and new cells are formed from
pre-existing cells (Omnis cellula—e cellula). He modiﬁed the hypothesis of
Schleiden and Schwann to give the cell theory a ﬁnal shape. Cell theory
as understood today is:

(i) all living organisms are composed of cells and products of cells.

(ii) all cells arise from pre-existing cells.

8.3 AN OVERVIEW OF CELL

You have earlier observed cells in an onion peel and/ or human cheek
cells under the microscope. Let us recollect their structure. The onion cell
which is a typical plant cell, has a distinct cell wall as its outer boundary
and just within it is the cell membrane. The cells of the human cheek
have an outer membrane as the delimiting structure of the cell. Inside
each cell is a dense membrane bound structure called nucleus. This
nucleus contains the chromosomes which in turn contain the genetic
material, DNA. Cells that have membrane bound nuclei are called
eukaryotic whereas cells that lack a membrane bound nucleus are
prokaryotic. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, a semi-ﬂuid matrix
called cytoplasm occupies the volume of the cell. The cytoplasm is the
main arena of cellular activities in both the plant and animal cells. Various
chemical reactions occur in it to keep the cell in the ‘living state’.

Besides the nucleus, the eukaryotic cells have other membrane bound
distinct structures called organelles like the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
the golgi complex, lysosomes, mitochondria, microbodies and vacuoles.
The prokaryotic cells lack such membrane bound organelles.

Ribosomes are non-membrane bound organelles found in all cells —
both eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic. Within the cell, ribosomes are
found not only in the cytoplasm but also within the two organelles —
chloroplasts (in plants) and mitochondria and on rough ER.

Animal cells contain another non-membrane bound organelle called
centrosome which helps in cell division.

Cells differ greatly in size, shape and activities (Figure 8. 1). For example,
Mycoplasmas, the smallest cells, are only 0.3 pm in length while bacteria