186

 

BIOLOGY

ﬁlaments form a network around the young root or they penetrate the
root cells. The hyphae have a very large surface area that absorb mineral
ions and water from the soil from a much larger volume of soil that perhaps
a root cannot do. The fungus provides minerals and water to the roots, in
turn the roots provide sugars and N-containing compounds to the
mycorrhizae. Some plants have an obligate association with the
mycorrhizae. For example, Pinus seeds cannot germinate and establish
without the presence of mycorrhizae.

1 1.3.2 Water Movement up a Plant

We looked at how plants absorb water from the soil, and move it into the
vascular tissues. We now have to try and understand how this water is
transported to various parts of the plant. Is the water movement active, or
is it still passive? Since the water has to be moved up a stem against
gravity, what provides the energy for this?

1 1 .3.2.1 Root Pressure

As various ions from the soil are actively transported into the vascular
tissues of the roots, water follows (its potential gradient) and increases
the pressure inside the xylem. This positive pressure is called root
pressure, and can be responsible for pushing up water to small heights
in the stem. How can we see that root pressure exists? Choose a small
soft-stemmed plant and on a day, when there is plenty of atmospheric
moisture, cut the stem horizontally near the base with a sharp blade,
early in the morning. You will soon see drops of solution ooze out of the
cut stem; this comes out due to the positive root pressure. If you ﬁx a
rubber tube to the cut stem as a sleeve you can actually collect and
measure the rate of exudation, and also determine the composition of the
exudates. Effects of root pressure is also observable at night and early
morning when evaporation is low, and excess water collects in the form of
droplets around special openings of veins near the tip of grass blades,
and leaves of many herbaceous parts. Such water loss in its liquid phase
is known as guttation.

Root pressure can, at best, only provide a modest push in the overall
process of water transport. They obviously do not play a major role in
water movement up tall trees. The greatest contribution of root pressure
may be to re-establish the continuous chains of water molecules in the
xylem which often break under the enormous tensions created by
transpiration. Root pressure does not account for the majority of water
transport; most plants meet their need by transpiratory pull.

11.3.2.2 Transpiration pull

Despite the absence of a heart or a circulatory system in plants, the
upward ﬂow of water through the xylem in plants can achieve fairly high