128

 

A typical eukaryotic cell Viruses

(10-20 mm)

BIOLOGY

prokaryotes have a cell wall surrounding the

w cell membrane except in mycoplasma. The ﬂuid
ﬂ matrix ﬁlling the cell is the cytoplasm. There is
no well-deﬁned nucleus. The genetic material is

Typical baCteria basically naked, not enveloped by a nuclear

(1 ‘2 pm) membrane. In addition to the genomic DNA (the
0c; 000 0 single chromosome/ circular DNA), many
000 °o 0 bacteria have small circular DNA outside the

PPLO genomic DNA. These smaller DNA are called

(about 0.1 “ml plasmids. The plasmid DNA confers certain
unique phenotypic characters to such bacteria.
One such character is resistance to antibiotics.
In higher classes you will learn that this plasmid
(002-02 Hm) DNA is used to monitor bacterial transformation

with foreign DNA. Nuclear membrane is found

Figure 8.2 Diagram showing comparison of in eukaryotes. No organelles, like the ones in
eukaryotic cell with other eukaryotes, are found in prokaryotic cells except

organisms

for ribosomes. Prokaryotes have something

unique in the form of inclusions. A specialised
differentiated form of cell membrane called mesosome is the characteristic
of prokaryotes. They are essentially infoldings of cell membrane.

8.4. 1 Cell Envelope and its Modiﬁcations

Most prokaryotic cells, particularly the bacterial cells, have a chemically
complex cell envelope. The cell envelope consists of a tightly bound three
layered structure i.e., the outermost glycocalyx followed by the cell wall and
then the plasma membrane. Although each layer of the envelope performs
distinct function, they act together as a single protective unit. Bacteria can
be classiﬁed into two groups on the basis of the differences in the cell envelopes
and the manner in which they respond to the staining procedure developed
by Gram viz. those that take up the gram stain are Gram positive and the
others that do not are called Gram negative bacteria.

Glycocalyx differs in composition and thickness among different
bacteria. It could be a loose sheath called the slime layer in some, while
in others it may be thick and tough, called the capsule. The cell wall
determines the shape of the cell and provides a strong structural support
to prevent the bacterium from bursting or collapsing.

The plasma membrane is selectively permeable in nature and interacts
with the outside world. This membrane is similar structurally to that of
the eukaryotes.

A special membranous structure is the mesosome which is formed
by the extensions of plasma membrane into the cell. ’Ihese extensions are
in the form of vesicles, tubules and lamellae. They help in cell wall