86

Intercelluar space

 

Thickened corners

  
  
 
    

Protoplasm

Vacuole
Cell wall

cell wall
A sclereid

A fibre

(C)

Figure 6.2 Simple tissues :
(a) Parenchyma
(b) Collenchyma
(c) Sclerenchyma

BIOLOGY

6. 1 .2 Permanent Tissues

The cells of the permanent tissues do not generally
divide further. Permanent tissues having all cells
similar in structure and function are called simple
tissues. Permanent tissues having many different
types of cells are called complex tissues.

6. 1 .2. 1 Simple Tissues

A simple tissue is made of only one type of cells.
The various simple tissues in plants are
parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma
(Figure 6.2). Parenchyma forms the major
component within organs. The cells of the
parenchyma are generally isodiametric. They
may be spherical, oval, round, polygonal or
elongated in shape. Their walls are thin and made
up of cellulose. They may either be closely packed
or have small intercellular spaces. The
parenchyma performs various functions like
photosynthesis, storage, secretion.

The collenchyma occurs in layers below the
epidermis in most of the dicotyledonous plants. It is
found either as a homogeneous layer or in patches.
It consists of cells which are much thickened at the
corners due to a deposition of cellulose,
hemicellulose and pectin. Collenchymatous cells
may be oval, spherical or polygonal and often
contain chloroplasts. These cells assimilate food
when they contain chloroplasts. Intercellular spaces
are absent. They provide mechanical support to the
growing parts of the plant such as young stem and
petiole of a leaf.

Sclerenchyma consists of long, narrow cells
with thick and lignified cell walls having a few or
numerous pits. They are usually dead and without
protoplasts. On the basis of variation in form,
structure, origin and development, sclerenchyma
may be either fibres or sclereids. The ﬁbres are
thick-walled, elongated and pointed cells,
generally occuring in groups, in various parts of
the plant. The sclereids are spherical, oval or
cylindrical, highly thickened dead cells with very