TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

membrane. This movement is dependent on the gradient. The apoplast
does not provide any barrier to water movement and water movement is
through mass ﬂow. As water evaporates into the intercellular spaces or
the atmosphere, tension develop in the continuous stream of water in the
apoplast, hence mass ﬂow of water occurs due to the adhesive and cohesive
properties of water.

The symplastic system is the system of interconnected protoplasts.
Neighbouring cells are connected through cytoplasmic strands that
extend through plasmodesmata. During symplastic movement, the water
travels through the cells — their cytoplasm; intercellular movement is
through the plasmodesmata. Water has to enter the cells through the
cell membrane, hence the movement is relatively slower. Movement is again
down a potential gradient. Symplastic movement may be aided by
cytoplasmic streaming. You may have observed cytoplasmic streaming
in cells of the Hydrilla leaf; the movement of chloroplast due to streaming
is easily visible.

Most of the water ﬂow in the roots occurs via the apoplast since the
cortical cells are loosely packed, and hence offer no resistance to water
movement. However, the inner boundary of the cortex, the endodermis,
is impervious to water because of a band of suberised matrix called the
casparian strip. Water molecules are unable to penetrate the layer, so
they are directed to wall regions that are not suberised, into the cells
proper through the membranes. The water then moves through the
symplast and again crosses a membrane to reach the cells of the xylem.
The movement of water through the root layers is ultimately symplastic
in the endodermis. This is the only
way water and other solutes can
enter the vascular cylinder.

Once inside the xylem, water is
again free to move between cells as
well as through them. In young
roots, water enters directly into the
xylem vessels and / or tracheids.
These are non-living conduits and
so are parts of the apoplast. The
path of water and mineral ions into
the root vascular system is
summarised in Figure 1 1.7.

Some plants have additional

Symplastic

185

Endodermis Xylem

 
   
  

Casp arian Phloem

    

A o lastic -
structures associated with them p pr; th Cortex strip . 1
that help in water (and mineral) Perlcyc e
absorption. A mycorrhiza iS a Figure 11.7 Symplastic and apoplastic pathways of

symbiotic association of a fungus
with a root system. The fungal

roots

water and ion absorption and movement in