LOCOMOT ION AND MOVEMENT

called locomotion. Animals move generally in search of food, shelter, mate, breeding
ground, better climate or to protect themselves.

The cells of the human body exhibit amoeboid, ciliary and muscular
movements. Locomotion and many other movements require coordinated muscular
activities. Three types of muscles are present in our body. Skeletal muscles are
attached to skeletal elements. They appear striated and are voluntary in nature.
Visceral muscles, present in the inner walls of visceral organs are nonstriated and
involuntary. Cardiac muscles are the muscles of the heart. They are striated,
branched and involuntary. Muscles possess excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity.

Muscle ﬁbre is the anatomical unit of muscle. Each muscle ﬁbre has many
parallelly arranged myoﬁbrils. Each myoﬁbril contains many serially arranged
units called sarcomere which are the functional units. Each sarcomere has a central
‘A’ band made of thick myosin ﬁlaments, and two half ‘1’ bands made of thin actin
ﬁlaments on either side of it marked by ‘2’ lines. Actin and myosin are polymerised
proteins with contractility. The active sites for rg’ﬁg'sin on resting acpn ﬁlament are
masked by a protein-troponin. Myosin head cg ta'i s ATPaseéafiglgi‘fas ATP binding
sites and active sites for actin. A motor neﬁ‘o‘gscanii’es signal‘tg the muscle ﬁbre
which generates an action potential inﬁt. ‘Tﬁisgtﬁuses’iigthﬁiﬁletase of Ca++ from
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca++ acﬁvagelggaic‘ft'igiﬁhich bing§‘§tg%ﬂ9ie myosin head to

form a cross bridge. These cross brﬁ'dges‘iﬁgl‘fthe acti -__ \ﬁlgﬁments causing them to
*e‘Vtraction. Ca++ are then

slide over the myosin ﬁlamentséggiggitgeieby cau ,_ 334%
returned to sarcoplasmic retigulﬁ-m Which inacﬁvateétlie actin. Cross bridges are
broken and the muscles rela3‘i’f. :33} f 1”} ‘i‘
V, A {*1ng ‘5

Repeated stimulation of muscles leadgsitd‘v‘fa‘tigue. Muscles are classiﬁed as
Red and White ﬁbres based primarily: on tﬁésiamount of red coloured myoglobin
pigment in them. D

Bones and cartilages constitute our skeletal system. The skeletal system is
divisible into axial and appendicular. Skull, vertebral column, ribs and sternum
constitute the axial skeleton. Limb bones and girdles form the appendicular
skeleton. Three types of joints are formed between bones or between bone and
cartilage — ﬁbrous, cartilaginous and synovial. Synovial joints allow considerable

movements and therefore, play a signiﬁcant role in locomotion.

    

   

EXERCISES

1. Draw the diagram of a sarcomere of skeletal muscle showing different regions.

2. Deﬁne sliding ﬁlament theory of muscle contraction.

3. Describe the important steps in muscle contraction.