104

Collagen ﬁbers

Cartilage cell
(chondrocyte)

 

REC “V
"“ Platelets

WBC
(C)

Figure 7.6 Specialised connective
tissues : (a) Cartilage
(b) Bone (c) Blood

BIOLOGY

bones and blood are various types of specialised
connective tissues.

The intercellular material of cartilage is solid and pliable
and resists compression. Cells of this tissue (chondrocytes)
are enclosed in small cavities within the matrix secreted by
them (Figure 7 .6a). Most of the cartilages in vertebrate
embryos are replaced by bones in adults. Cartilage is
present in the tip of nose, outer ear joints, between adjacent
bones of the vertebral column, limbs and hands in adults.

Bones have a hard and non-pliable ground substance
rich in calcium salts and collagen ﬁbres which give bone
its strength Wigure 7 .6b). It is the main tissue that provides
structural frame to the body. Bones support and protect
softer tissues and organs. The bone cells (osteocytes) are
present in the spaces called lacunae. Limb bones, such as
the long bones of the legs, serve weight-bearing functions.
They also interact with skeletal muscles attached to them
to bring about movements. The bone marrow in some bones
is the site of production of blood cells.

Blood is a ﬂuid connective tissue containing plasma,
red blood cells REC), white blood cells (WBC) and platelets
(Figure 7.60). It is the main circulating ﬂuid that helps in
the transport of various substances. You will learn more
about blood in Chapters 17 and 18.

7. 1 .3 Muscle Tissue

Each muscle is made of many long, cylindrical fibres
arranged in parallel arrays. These ﬁbres are composed of
numerous ﬁne ﬁbrils, called myofibrils. Muscle ﬁbres
contract (shorten) in response to stimulation, then relax
(lengthen) and return to their uncontracted state in a
coordinated fashion. Their action moves the body to adjust
to the changes in the environment and to maintain the
positions of the various parts of the body. In general,
muscles play an active role in all the movements of the body.
Muscles are of three types, skeletal, smooth, and cardiac.

Skeletal muscle tissue is closely attached to skeletal
bones. In a typical muscle such as the biceps, striated
(striped) skeletal muscle ﬁbres are bundled together in a
parallel fashion (Figure 7 .7 a). A sheath of tough connective
tissue encloses several bundles of muscle ﬁbres (You will
learn more about this in Chapter 20).