PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS

 

ATP is synthesised by cells (in mitochondria and
chloroplasts) is named phosphorylation. Photo- Photosystem I
pho sphorylation is the synthesis of ATP from

l—l
ADP and inorganic phosphate in the presence of
light. When the two photosystems work in a ' W '
series, ﬁrst PS 11 and then the PS I, a process called ‘
non-cyclic photo-phosphorylation occurs. The \
two photosystems are connected through an \ 03% E1 tr
electron transport chain, as seen earlier— in the \\ {9 US$13;
Z scheme. Both ATP and NADPH + H+ are \
synthesised by this kind of electron ﬂow (Figure
13.5).

When only PS I is functional, the electron is
circulated within the photosystem and the
phosphorylation occurs due to cyclic ﬂow of
electrons (Figure 13.6). A possible location
where this could be happening is in the stroma
lamellae. While the membrane or lamellae of the grana have both PS I
and PS 11 the stroma lamellae membranes lack PS II as well as NADP
reductase enzyme. The excited electron does not pass on to NADP+ but is
cycled back to the PS I complex through the electron transport chain
(Figure 13.6). The cyclic ﬂow hence, results only in the synthesis of ATP,
but not of NADPH + H“. Cyclic photophosphorylation also occurs when
only light of wavelengths beyond 680 nm are available for excitation.

    
 

Figure 13.6 Cyclic photophosphorylation

13.6.3 Chemiosmotic Hypothesis

Let us now ﬂy and understand how actually ATP is synthesised in the
chloroplast. The Chemiosmotic hypothesis has been put forward to explain
the mechanism. Like in respiration, in photosynthesis too, ATP synthesis is
linked to development of a proton gradient across a membrane. This time
these are the membranes of thylakoid. There is one difference though, here
the proton accumulation is towards the inside of the membrane, i.e., in the
lumen. In respiration, protons accumulate in the intermembrane space of
the mitochondria when electrons move through the ETS (Chapter 14).

Let us understand what causes the proton gradient across the
membrane. We need to consider again the processes that take place during
the activation of electrons and their transport to determine the steps that
cause a proton gradient to develop (Figure 13.7).

(a) Since splitting of the water molecule takes place on the inner side of
the membrane, the protons or hydrogen ions that are produced by
the splitting of water accumulate within the lumen of the thylakoids.