208

BIOLOGY

It was not until about 1854 that Julius von Sachs provided evidence
for production of glucose when plants grow. Glucose is usually stored as
starch. His later studies showed that the green substance in plants
(chlorophyll as we know it now) is located in special bodies (later called
chloroplasts) within plant cells. He found that the green parts in plants is
where glucose is made, and that the glucose is usually stored as starch.

Now consider the interesting experiments done by T.W Engelmann
(1843 — 1909). Using a prism he split light into its spectral components
and then illuminated a green alga, Cladophora, placed in a suspension
of aerobic bacteria. The bacteria were used to detect the sites of 02
evolution. He observed that the bacteria accumulated mainly in the region
of blue and red light of the split spectrum. A first action spectrum of
photosynthesis was thus described. It resembles roughly the absorption
spectra of chlorophyll aand b (discussed in section 13.4).

By the middle of the nineteenth century the key features of plant
photosynthesis were known, namely, that plants could use light energy
to make carbohydrates from CO2 and water. The empirical equation
representing the total process of photosynthesis for oxygen evolving
organisms was then understood as:

Light

co2 + H20 [CHZO]+ 02

where [CHZO] represented a carbohydrate (e.g., glucose, a six-carbon
sugar).

A milestone contribution to the understanding of photosynthesis was
that made by a microbiologist, Cornelius van Niel (1897-1985), who,
based on his studies of purple and green bacteria, demonstrated that
photosynthesis is essentially a light-dependent reaction in which
hydrogen from a suitable oxidisable compound reduces carbon dioxide
to carbohydrates. This can be expressed by:

Light

2H2A+CO2 2A+CH2O+ H20

In green plants H20 is the hydrogen donor and is oxidised to 02. Some
organisms do not release 02 during photosynthesis. When H28, instead
is the hydrogen donor for purple and green sulphur bacteria, the
‘oxidation’ product is sulphur or sulphate depending on the organism
and not 02. Hence, he inferred that the O2 evolved by the green plant
comes from H20, not from carbon dioxide. This was later proved by using
radioisotopic techniques. The correct equation, that would represent the
overall process of photosynthesis is therefore:

Light

esco2 + 12H2O C6H1206 +6H20+ 602

where C6 H12 06 represents glucose. The 02 released is from water; this
was proved using radio isotope techniques. Note that this is not a single

2019-2020