BIOLOGY

Mammals from colder climates generally have shorter ears and limbs
to minimise heat loss. (This is called the Allen’s Rule.) In the polar seas
aquatic mammals like seals have a thick layer of fat (blubber) below their
skin that acts as an insulator and reduces loss of body heat.

Some organisms possess adaptations that are physiological which
allow them to respond quickly to a stressful situation. If you had ever
been to any high altitude place (>3,500m Rohtang Pass near Manali and
Leh you must have experienced what is called altitude sickness. Its
symptoms include nausea, fatigue and heart palpitations. This is because
in the low atmospheric pressure of high altitudes, the body does not get
enough oxygen. But, gradually you get acclimatised and stop experiencing
altitude sickness. How did your body solve this problem? The body
compensates low oxygen availability by increasing red blood cell
production, decreasing the binding affinity of hemoglobin and by
increasing breathing rate. Many tribes live in the high altitude of
Himalayas. Find out if they normally have a higher red blood cell count
(or total hemoglobin) than people living in the plains.

In most animals, the metabolic reactions and hence all the
physiological functions proceed optimally in a narrow temperature range
(in humans, it is 37 OC). But there are microbes (archaebacteria) that
ﬂourish in hot springs and deep sea hydrothermal vents where
temperatures far exceed 100°C. How is this possible?

Many ﬁsh thrive in Antarctic waters where the temperature is always
below zero. How do they manage to prevent their body ﬂuids from freezing?

A large variety of marine invertebrates and ﬁsh live at great depths in
the ocean where the pressure could be > 100 times the normal atmospheric
pressure that we experience. How do they live under such high pressures
and do they have any special enzymes? Organisms living in such extreme
environments show a fascinating array of biochemical adaptations.

Some organisms show behavioural responses to cope up with
variations in their environment. Desert lizards lack the physiological ability
that mammals have to deal with the high temperatures of their habitat,
but manage to keep their body temperature fairly constant by behavioural
means. They bask in the sun and absorb heat when their body
temperature drops below the comfort zone, but move into shade when
the ambient temperature starts increasing. Some species are capable of
burrowing into the soil to hide and escape from the above-ground heat.

13.2 POPULATIONS

13.2. 1 Population Attributes

In nature, we rarely ﬁnd isolated, single individuals of any species; majority
of them live in groups in a well deﬁned geographical area, share or compete
for similar resources, potentially interbreed and thus constitute a
population. Although the term interbreeding implies sexual reproduction,

2019-2020