BIOLOGY

dwindling Amazon forest is estimated to produce, through
photosynthesis, 20 per cent of the total oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.
Can we put an economic value on this service by nature? You can get
some idea by ﬁnding out how much your neighborhood hospital spends
on a cylinder of oxygen. Pollination (without which plants cannot give
us fruits or seeds) is another service, ecosystems provide through
pollinators layer — bees, bumblebees, birds and bats. What will be the
costs of accomplishing pollination without help from natural
pollinators? There are other intangible beneﬁts — that we derive from
nature—the aesthetic pleasures of walking through thick woods, watching
spring ﬂowers in full bloom or waking up to a bulbul’s song in the
morning. Can we put a price tag on such things?

The ethical argument for conserving biodiversity relates to what we
owe to millions of plant, animal and microbe species with whom we share
this planet. Philosophically or spiritually, we need to realise that every
species has an intrinsic value, even if it may not be of current or any
economic value to us. We have a moral duty to care for their well-being
and pass on our biological legacy in good order to future generations.

15.2.2 How do we conserve Biodiversity?

When we conserve and protect the whole ecosystem, its biodiversity at all
levels is protected - we save the entire forest to save the tiger. This approach
is called in situ (on site) conservation. However, when there are situations
where an animal or plant is endangered or threatened (organisms facing
a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future) and needs
urgent measures to save it from extinction, ex situ (off site) conservation
is the desirable approach.

In situ conservation— Faced with the conﬂict between development and
conservation, many nations ﬁnd it unrealistic and economically not feasible
to conserve all their biological wealth. Invariably, the number of species
waiting to be saved from extinction far exceeds the conservation resources
available. On a global basis, this problem has been addressed by eminent
conservationists. They identified for maximum protection certain
‘biodiversity hotspots’ regions with very high levels of species richness
and high degree of endemism (that is, species confined to that region
and not found anywhere else). Initially 25 biodiversity hotspots were
identiﬁed but subsequently nine more have been added to the list,
bringing the total number of biodiversity hotspots in the world to 34.
These hotspots are also regions of accelerated habitat loss. Three of
these hotspots — Western Ghats and Sri Lanka, Indo-Burma and
Himalaya — cover our country’s exceptionally high biodiversity regions.
Although all the biodiversity hotspots put together cover less than
2 per cent of the earth’s land area, the number of species they collectively

2019-2020