102

 

Figure 7.2 Glandular epithelium : (a) Unicellular . . .
(b) Multicellular exocnne and endocnne glands. Exocrine

 

Figure 7.3 Compound epithelium

 

BIOLOGY

Some of the columnar or cuboidal cells
get specialised for secretion and are called

   

‘ 3 glandular epithelium (Figure 7 .2). They

are mainly of two types: unicellular,

gland 5 consisting of isolated glandular cells (goblet
/<9‘:~; ‘_ K) cells of the alimentary canal), and

. \ ~/ multicellular, consisting of cluster of cells
Mulglugﬁguar SZ‘EW (salivary gland). On the basis of the mode of
(b) pouring of their secretions, glands are

divided into two categories namely

glands secrete mucus, saliva, earwax, oil,
milk, digestive enzymes and other cell
products. These products are released
through ducts or tubes. In contrast,
endocrine glands do not have ducts. Their
products called hormones are secreted
directly into the ﬂuid bathing the gland.

Compound epithelium is made of more
than one layer (multi—layered) of cells and thus
has a limited role in secretion and absorption
Wigure 7 .3). Their main function is to provide
protection against chemical and mechanical
stresses. They cover the dry surface of the skin,
the moist surface of buccal cavity, pharynx,
inner lining of ducts of salivary glands and of
pancreatic ducts.

All cells in epithelium are held together with little intercellular material.
In nearly all animal tissues, specialised junctions provide both structural
and functional links between its individual cells. Three types of cell j unctions
are found in the epithelium and other tissues. These are called as tight,
adhering and gap junctions. Tight junctions help to stop substances
from leaking across a tissue. Adhering junctions perform cementing to
keep neighbouring cells together. Gap junctions facilitate the cells to
communicate with each other by connecting the cytoplasm of adjoining
cells, for rapid transfer of ions, small molecules and sometimes big molecules.

7. 1 .2 Connective Tissue

Connective tissues are most abundant and widely distributed in the body
of complex animals. They are named connective tissues because of their
special function of linking and supporting other tissues/ organs of the
body. They range from soft connective tissues to specialised types, which