Figure 13.8 Showing bee-a pollinator
on orchid ﬂower

BIOLOGY

its larvae. The wasp pollinates the ﬁg inﬂorescence while
searching for suitable egg-laying sites. In return for the
favour of pollination the fig offers the wasp some of its
developing seeds, as food for the developing wasp larvae.

Orchids show a bewildering diversity of ﬂoral
patterns many of which have evolved to attract the right
pollinator insect (bees and bumblebees) and ensure
guaranteed pollination by it (Figure l 3.8). Not all
orchids offer rewards. The Mediterranean orchid
Ophrys employs ‘sexual deceit’ to get pollination done
by a species of bee. One petal of its ﬂower bears an
uncanny resemblance to the female of the bee in size,
colour and markings. The male bee is attracted to what
it perceives as a female, ‘pseudocopulates’ with the
ﬂower, and during that process is dusted with pollen
from the ﬂower. When this same bee ‘pseudocopulates’
with another ﬂower, it transfers pollen to it and thus,
pollinates the ﬂower. Here you can see how co-evolution

operates. If the female bee’s colour patterns change even slightly for any
reason during evolution, pollination success will be reduced unless the
orchid ﬂower co-evolves to maintain the resemblance of its petal to the

female bee.

 

 

SUMMARY

238

wmv

 

 

As a branch of biology, Ecologr is the study of the relationships of
living organisms with the abiotic (physico-chemical factors) and biotic
components (other species) of their environment. It is concerned
with four levels of biological organisation-organisms, populations,
communities and biomes.

Temperature, light, water and soil are the most important
physical factors of the environment to which the organisms are
adapted in various ways. Maintenance of a constant internal
environment (homeostasis) by the organisms contributes to optimal
performance, but only some organisms (regulators) are capable of
homeostasis in the face of changing external environment. Others
either partially regulate their internal environment or simply
conform. A few other species have evolved adaptations to avoid
unfavourable conditions in space (migration) or in time (aestivation,
hibernation, and diapause).

Evolutionary changes through natural selection take place at
the population level and hence, population ecology is an important
area of ecology. A population is a group of individuals of a given
species sharing or competing for similar resources in a defined
geographical area. Populations have attributes that individual
organisms do not- birth rates and death rates, sex ratio and age

2019—2020