BIOLOGY

Those who take drugs intravenously (direct injection into the vein
using a needle and syringe), are much more likely to acquire serious
infections like AIDS and Hepatitis B. The viruses, which are responsible
for these diseases, are transferred from one person to another by sharing
of infected needles and syringes. Both AIDS and Hepatitis B infections
are chronic infections and ultimately fatal. Both can be transmitted
through sexual contact or infected blood.

The use of alcohol during adolescence may also have long-term effects.
It could lead to heavy drinking in adulthood. The chronic use of drugs and
alcohol damages nervous system and liver (cirrhosis). The use of drugs
and alcohol during pregnancy is also known to adversely affect the foetus.

Another misuse of drugs is what certain sportspersons do to enhance
their performance. They (mis)use narcotic analgesics, anabolic steroids,
diuretics and certain hormones in sports to increase muscle strength and
bulk and to promote aggressiveness and as a result increase athletic
performance. The side-effects of the use of anabolic steroids in females
include masculinisation (features like males), increased aggressiveness,
mood swings, depression, abnormal menstrual cycles, excessive hair
growth on the face and body, enlargement of clitoris, deepening of voice.
In males it includes acne, increased aggressiveness, mood swings,
depression, reduction of size of the testicles, decreased sperm production,
potential for kidney and liver dysfunction, breast enlargement, premature
baldness, enlargement of the prostate gland. These effects may be
permanent with prolonged use. In the adolescent male or female, severe
facial and body acne, and premature closure of the growth centres of the
long bones may result in stunted growth.

8.5.4 Prevention and Control

The age-old adage of ‘prevention is better than cure’ holds true here also.
It is also true that habits such as smoking, taking drug or alcohol are
more likely to be taken up at a young age, more during adolescence.
Hence, it is best to identify the situations that may push an adolescent
towards use of drugs or alcohol, and to take remedial measures well in
time. In this regard, the parents and the teachers have a special
responsibility. Parenting that combines with high levels of nurturance
and consistent discipline, has been associated with lowered risk of
substance (alcohol/ drugs / tobacco) abuse. Some of the measures
mentioned here would be particularly useful for prevention and control
of alcohol and drugs abuse among adolescents
(i) Avoid undue peer pressure - Every child has his / her own choice
and personality, which should be respected and nurtured. A child
should not be pushed unduly to perform beyond his / her threshold
limits; be it studies, sports or other activities.

2019—2020