BIOLOGY

check? Grafts from just any source — an animal, another primate, or any
human beings cannot be made since the grafts would be rejected sooner
or later. Tissue matching, blood group matching are essential before
undertaking any graft / transplant and even after this the patient has to
take immuno—suppresants all his / her life. The body is able to differentiate
‘self’ and ‘nonself and the cell-mediated immune response is responsible
for the graft rejection.

8.2.3 Active and Passive Immunity

When a host is exposed to antigens, which may be in the form of living
or dead microbes or other proteins, antibodies are produced in the host
body. This type of immunity is called active immunity. Active immunity
is slow and takes time to give its full effective response. Injecting the
microbes deliberately during immunisation or infectious organisms
gaining access into body during natural infection induce active
immunity. When ready-made antibodies are directly given to protect
the body against foreign agents, it is called passive immunity. Do you
know why mother’s milk is considered very essential for the new-
born infant? The yellowish ﬂuid colostrum secreted by mother during
the initial days of lactation has abundant antibodies ﬂgA) to protect the
infant. The foetus also receives some antibodies from their mother,
through the placenta during pregnancy. These are some examples of
passive immunity.

8.2.4 Vaccination and Immunisation

The principle of immunisation or vaccination is based on the property of
‘memory’ of the immune system. In vaccination, a preparation of antigenic
proteins of pathogen or inactivated / weakened pathogen (vaccine) are
introduced into the body. The antibodies produced in the body against
these antigens would neutralise the pathogenic agents during actual
infection. The vaccines also generate memory — B and T-cells that recognise
the pathogen quickly on subsequent exposure and overwhelm the
invaders with a massive production of antibodies. If a person is infected
with some deadly microbes to which quick immune response is required
as in tetanus, we need to directly inject the preformed antibodies, or
antitoxin (a preparation containing antibodies to the toxin). Even in cases
of snakebites, the injection which is given to the patients, contain preformed
antibodies against the snake venom. This type of immunisation is called
passive immunisation.

Recombinant DNA technology has allowed the production of antigenic
polypeptides of pathogen in bacteria or yeast. Vaccines produced using
this approach allow large scale production and hence greater availability
for immunisation, e. g., hepatitis B vaccine produced from yeast.

2019—2020