PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS

reaction but description of a multistep process called photosynthesis.

Can you explain why twelve molecules of water as substrate are used
in the equation given above?

13.3 WHERE DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS TAKE PLACE?

You would of course answer: in ‘the green leaf or ‘in the chloroplasts’,
based on what you earlier read in Chapter 8. You are deﬁnitely right.
Photosynthesis does take place in the green leaves of plants but it does so
also in other green parts of the plants. Can you name some other parts
where you think photosynthesis may occur?

You would recollect from previous unit that the mesophyll cells in the
leaves, have a large number of chloroplasts. Usually the chloroplasts align
themselves along the walls of the mesophyll cells, such that they get the
optimum quantity of the incident light. When do you think the
chloroplasts will be aligned with their ﬂat surfaces parallel to the walls?
When would they be perpendicular to the incident light?

You have studied the structure of chloroplast in Chapter 8. Within
the chloroplast there is membranous system consisting of grana, the
stroma lamellae, and the matrix stroma (Figure 13.2). There is a clear
division of labour within the chloroplast. The membrane system is
responsible for trapping the light energy and also for the synthesis of ATP
and NADPH. In stroma, enzymatic reactions synthesise sugar, which in
turn forms starch. The former set of reactions, since they are directly light
driven are called light reactions (photochemical reactions). The latter
are not directly light driven but are dependent on the products of light
reactions (ATP and NADPH). Hence, to distinguish the latter they are called,
by convention, as dark reactions (carbon reactions). However, this should
not be construed to mean that they occur in darkness or that they are not
light-dependent.

   
  
 
 
  
 

Grana

Stroma

Ribosomes

Figure 13.2 Diagrammatic representation of an electron micrograph of a section of

chloroplast

2019-2020

Stromal lamella

Starch granule

Lipid droplet

209

Outer membrane

Inner membrane