DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

 

The digested end products are absorbed into the body through the epithelial lining
of the intestinal villi. ’Ihe undigested food (faeces) enters into the caecum of the large
intestine through ileo-caecal valve, which prevents the back ﬂow of the faecal matter.
Most of the water is absorbed in the large intestine. The undigested food becomes
semi- solid in nature and then enters into the rectum, anal canal and is ﬁnally egested
out through the anus.

EXERCISES

1. Choose the correct answer among the following :
(a) Gastric juice contains
(i) pepsin, lipase and rennin
(ii) trypsin, lipase and rennin
(iii) trypsin, pepsin and lipase
(iv) trypsin, pepsin and renin
(b) Succus entericus is the name given to
(i) a junction between ileum and large intestine
(ii) intestinal juice
(iii) swelling in the gut
(iv) appendix

2. Match column I with column 11

Column I Column H

(a) Bilirubin and biliverdin (i) Parotid
(b) Hydrolysis of starch (ii) Bile

(c) Digestion of fat (iii) Lipases
(d) Salivary gland (iv) Amylases

3. Answer brieﬂy:

(a) Why are villi present in the intestine and not in the stomach?
(b) How does pepsinogen change into its active form?
(c) What are the basic layers of the wall of alimentary canal?
(d) How does bile help in the digestion of fats?
State the role of pancreatic juice in digestion of proteins.
Describe the process of digestion of protein in stomach.
Give the dental formula of human beings.
Bile juice contains no digestive enzymes, yet it is important for digestion. Why?

Describe the digestive role of chymotrypsin. Which two other digestive enzymes
of the same category are secreted by its source gland?

How are polysaccharides and disaccharides digested?
10. What would happen if HCl were not secreted in the stomach?
1 1. How does butter in your food get digested and absorbed in the body?

12. Discuss the main steps in the digestion of proteins as the food passes through
different parts of the alimentary canal.

13. Explain the term thecodont and diphyodont.
14. Name different types of teeth and their number in an adult human.
15. What are the functions of liver?

9°N®91P

.0