PLANT KINGDOM 43

A dominant, independent, photosynthetic, thalloid or erect phase is
represented by a haploid gametophyte and it alternates with the short-
lived multicelluler sporophyte totally or partially dependent on the
gametophyte for its anchorage and nutrition. All bryophytes represent
this pattern.

The diploid sporophyte is represented by a dominant, independent,
photosynthetic, vascular plant body. It alternates with multicellular,
saprophytic/autotrophic, independent but short-lived haploid
gametophyte. Such a pattern is known as haplo-diplontic life cycle. All
pteridophytes exhibit this pattern (Figure 3.7 c).

Interestingly, while most algal genera are haplontic, some of them
such as Ectocarpus, Polysiphonia, kelps are haplo-diplontic. Fucus, an
alga is diplontic.

SUMMARY

Plant kingdom includes algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and
angiosperms. Algae are chlorophyll-bearing simple, thalloid, autotrophic and
largely aquatic organisms. Depending on the type of pigment possesed and the
type of stored food, algae are classﬁed 111,430 three classes, namely Chlorophyceae,
Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyc‘éaae Algae usu6llléy reproduce vegetatively by
fragmentation, asexually by fdrmatlon of diff "lent types of spores and sexually by
formation of gametes which ma show isog yﬁanlsogamy or oogamy.

Bryophytes are plants which can live in soil but are dependent on water for
sexual reproduction. Then: plant body: is more differentiated than that of algae. It
is thallus— like and prostrate or erect‘anwxattached to the substratum by rhizoids.
They possess root- like, leaf— l1liie: and stern- like structures. The bryophytes are
divided into liverworts and mosses The plant body of liverworts is thalloid and
dorsiventral whereas mosses "have upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged
leaves. The main plant bo631: of a bryophyte is gamete- producing and is called a
gametophyte. It bears th‘é male sex organs called antheridia and female sex organs
called archegoma»~The male and female gametes produced fuse to form zygote
which produces a fllulticellular body called a sporophyte. It produces haploid
spores. The spores germinate to form gametophytes.

In pteridophytes the main plant is a sporophyte which is differentiated into
true root, stem and leaves. These organs possess well-differentiated vascular
tissues. The sporophytes bear sporangia which produce spores. The spores
germinate to form gametophytes which require cool, damp places to grow. The
gametophytes bear male and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia,
respectively. Water is required for transfer of male gametes to archegonium where
zygote is formed after fertilisation. The zygote produces a sporophyte.