PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

5.4 POLYGENIC INHERITANCE

Mendel’s studies mainly described those traits that have distinct alternate
forms such as ﬂower colour which are either purple or white. But if you
look around you will ﬁnd that there are many traits which are not so
distinct in their occurrence and are spread across a gradient. For example,
in humans we don’t just have tall or short people as two distinct
alternatives but a whole range of possible heights. Such traits are generally
controlled by three or more genes and are thus called as polygenic traits.
Besides the involvement of multiple genes polygenic inheritance also takes
into account the inﬂuence of environment. Human skin colour is another
classic example for this. In a polygenic trait the phenotype reﬂects the
contribution of each allele, i.e., the effect of each allele is additive. To
understand this better let us assume that three genes A, B, C control skin
colour in human with the dominant forms A, B and C responsible for
dark skin colour and the recessive forms a, b and c for light skin colour.
The genotype with all the dominant alleles (AABBCC) will have the darkest
skin colour and that with all the recessive alleles (aabbcc) will have the
lightest skin colour. As expected the genotype with three dominant alleles
and three recessive alleles will have an intermediate skin colour. In this
manner the number of each type of alleles in the genotype would determine
the darkness or lightness of the skin in an individual.

5.5 PLEIOTROPY

We have so far seen the effect of a gene on a single phenotype or trait.
There are however instances where a single gene can exhibit multiple
phenotypic expression. Such a gene is called a pleiotropic gene. The
underlying mechanism of pleiotropy in most cases is the effect of a gene
on metabolic pathways which contribute towards different phenotypes.
An example of this is the disease phenylketonuria, which occurs in
humans. The disease is caused by mutation in the gene that codes for the
enzyme phenyl alanine hydroxylase (single gene mutation). This manifests
itself through phenotypic expression characterised by mental
retardation and a reduction in hair and skin pigmentation.

5.6 SEX DETERMINATION

The mechanism of sex determination has always been a puzzle before the
geneticists. The initial clue about the genetic / chromosomal mechanism
of sex determination can be traced back to some of the experiments carried
out in insects. In fact, the cytological observations made in a number of
insects led to the development of the concept of genetic / chromosomal
basis of sex-determination. Henking (189 1) could trace a specific nuclear
structure all through spermatogenesis in a few insects, and it was also
observed by him that 50 per cent of the sperm received this structure
after spermatogenesis, whereas the other 50 per cent sperm did not receive
it. Henking gave a name to this structure as the X body but he could not
explain its signiﬁcance. Further investigations by other scientists led to
the conclusion that the ‘X body’ of Henking was in fact a chromosome

2019-2020