ANIMAL KINGDOM

SUMMARY

The basic fundamental features such as level of organisation, symmetry, cell
organisation, coelom, segmentation, notochord, etc., have enabled us to broadly
classify the animal kingdom. Besides the fundamental features, there are many
other distinctive characters which are specific for each phyla or class.

Porifera includes multicellular animals which exhibit cellular level of
organisation and have characteristic ﬂagellated choanocytes. The coelenterates
have tentacles and bear cnidoblasts. They are mostly aquatic, sessile or ﬁ‘ee-ﬂoating.
The ctenophores are marine animals with comb plates. The platyhelminths have
ﬂat body and exhibit bilateral symmetry. The parasitic forms show distinct suckers
and hooks. Aschelminthes are pseudocoelomates and include parasitic as well as
non- parasitic roundworms.

Annelids are metamerically segmented animals with a true coelom. The
arthropods are the most abundant group of animals characterised by the presence
of j01nted appendages. The molluscs have a sp’ft body surrounded by an external

calcareous shell. The body 1s covered mth‘ve ﬁg. mal Skeleton made of chitin. The
echinoderms possess a spiny skin. Their most d1st1nct11§eﬁeature 1s the presence

 

of water vascular system. The hemichorda / sare a small grdiéfp: ofworm-like marine

4:,"

animals. They have a cylindrical bpdy wi 7 ‘ olgar and trunk.

Phylum Chordata 1ncludes~\an1mals which, :possess a notochord either
throughout or during early smbmmc life. Qgtahgr algfﬁmon features observed in
the chordates are the dorsal, hoJlow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits.
Some of the vertebrates’do "not possess jaws [Agnatha] whereas most of them possess
jaws (Gnathostomata) aAgnatha 1s represented by the class, Cyclostomata. They

 

a» 4;

are the most primitive chordates and " gectoparas1tes on ﬁshes. Gnathostomata
has two super classes, Piscesu and Tetrapoda. Classes Chondrichthyes and
Osteichthyes bear ﬁns for locomotion and are grouped under Pisces. The
Chondrichthyes are ﬁshes with cartilaginous endoskeleton and are marine. Classes,
Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia have two pairs of limbs and are thus
grouped under Tetrapoda. The amphibians have adapted to live both on land and
water. Reptiles are characterised by the presence of dry and corniﬁed skin. Limbs
are absent in snakes. Fishes, amphibians and reptiles are poikilothermous (cold-
blooded). Aves are warm-blooded animals with feathers on their bodies and
forelimbs modiﬁed into wings for ﬂying. Hind limbs are adapted for walking,
swimming, perching or clasping. The unique features of mammals are the presence
of mammary glands and hairs on the skin. They commonly exhibit viviparity.

 

61