132

 

BIOLOGY

An improved model of the structure of cell membrane was proposed
by Singer and Nicolson (1972) widely accepted as ﬂuid mosaic model
(Figure 8.4). According to this, the quasi-ﬂuid nature of lipid enables
lateral movement of proteins within the overall bilayer. This ability to move
within the membrane is measured as its ﬂuidity.

The ﬂuid nature of the membrane is also important from the point of
view of functions like cell growth, formation of intercellular junctions,
secretion, endocytosis, cell division etc.

One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is the
transport of the molecules across it. The membrane is selectively permeable
to some molecules present on either side of it. Many molecules can move
brieﬂy across the membrane without any requirement of energy and this
is called the passive transport. Neutral solutes may move across the
membrane by the process of simple diffusion along the concentration
gradient, i.e., from higher concentration to the lower. Water may also move
across this membrane from higher to lower concentration. Movement of
water by diffusion is called osmosis. As the polar molecules cannot pass
through the nonpolar lipid bilayer, they require a carrier protein of the
membrane to facilitate their transport across the membrane. A few ions
or molecules are transported across the membrane against their
concentration gradient, i.e., from lower to the higher concentration. Such
a transport is an energy dependent process, in which ATP is utilised and
is called active transport, e. g., Na+/K+ Pump.

8.5.2 CellWall

As you may recall, a non-living rigid structure called the cell wall forms
an outer covering for the plasma membrane of fungi and plants. Cell wall
not only gives shape to the cell and protects the cell from mechanical
damage and infection, it also helps in cell-to-cell interaction and provides
barrier to undesirable macromolecules. Algae have cell wall, made of
cellulose, galactans, mannans and minerals like calcium carbonate, while
in other plants it consists of cellulose, hemicellulose, pectins and proteins.
The cell wall of a young plant cell, the primary wall is capable of growth,
which gradually diminishes as the cell matures and the secondary wall is
formed on the inner (towards membrane) side of the cell.

The middle lamella is a layer mainly of calcium pectate which holds
or glues the different neighbouring cells together. The cell wall and middle
lamellae may be traversed by plasmodesmata which connect the cytoplasm
of neighbouring cells.

8.5.3 Endomembrane System

While each of the membranous organelles is distinct in terms of its