78

A
@QE
Q .7
v

6 g K2+2 C4 A2+4 9(2]

Figure 5.20 Floral diagram with
ﬂoral formula

BIOLOGY

5.8 SEMI-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF A TYPICAL
FLOWERING PLANT

Various morphological features are used to describe a
ﬂowering plant. The description has to be brief, in a simple
and scientific language and presented in a proper
sequence. The plant is described beginning with its habit,
vegetative characters — roots, stem and leaves and then
ﬂoral characters inﬂorescence and ﬂower parts. After
describing various parts of plant, a ﬂoral diagram and a
ﬂoral formula are presented. The ﬂoral formula is
represented by some symbols. In the ﬂoral formula, Br
stands for bracteate K stands for calyx , C for corolla, P for
perianth, A for androecium and G for Gynoecium, Q for

superior ovary and a for inferior ovary, 6" for male, 9 for

female, 9” for bisexual plants, 9 for actinomorphic and Ole
for zygomorphic nature of ﬂower. Fusion is indicated by
enclosing the ﬁgure within bracket and adhesion by a line
drawn above the symbols of the ﬂoral parts. A ﬂoral
diagram provides information about the number of parts
of a ﬂower, their arrangement and the relation they have
with one another (Figure 5.20). The position of the mother
axis with respect to the ﬂower is represented by a dot on
the top of the ﬂoral diagram. Calyx, corolla, androecium
and gynoecium are drawn in successive whorls, calyx being
the outermost and the gynoecium being in the centre.
Floral formula also shows cohesion and adhesion within
parts of whorls and between whorls. The ﬂoral diagram
and ﬂoral formula in Figure 5.20 represents the mustard
plant (Family: Brassicaceae).

5.9 DESCRIPTION OF SOME IMPORTANT FAMILIES

5.9. 1 Fabaceae

This family was earlier called Papilionoideae, a subfamily
of family Leguminosae. It is distributed all over the world
(Figure 5.2 1).

Vegetative Characters

Trees, shrubs, herbs; root with root nodules

Stem: erect or climber

Leaves: alternate, pinnately compound or simple; leaf base,
pulvinate; stipulate; venation reticulate.