PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

15.2 DIFFERENTIATION, DEDIFFERENTIATION AND
REDIFFERENTIATION

The cells derived from root apical and shoot-apical meristems and
cambium differentiate and mature to perform speciﬁc functions. This act
leading to maturation is termed as differentiation. During differentiation,
cells undergo few to major structural changes both in their cell walls and
protoplasm. For example, to form a tracheary element, the cells would
lose their protoplasm. They also develop a very strong, elastic,
lignocellulosic secondary cell walls, to carry water to long distances even
under extreme tension. Try to correlate the various anatomical features
you encounter in plants to the functions they perform.

Plants show another interesting phenomenon. The living differentiated
cells, that by now have lost the capacity to divide can regain the capacity
of division under certain conditions. This phenomenon is termed as
dedifferentiation. For example, formation of meristems — interfascicular
cambium and cork cambium from fully differentiated parenchyma cells.
While doing so, such meristems / tissues are able to divide and produce
cells that once again lose the capacity to divide but mature to perform
speciﬁc functions, i.e., get redifferentiated. List some of the tissues in a
woody dicotyledenous plant that are the products of redifferentiation.
How would you describe a tumour? What would you call the parenchyma
cells that are made to divide under controlled laboratory conditions during
plant tissue culture?

Recall, in Section 15. 1. 1, we have mentioned that the grth in plants
is open, i.e., it can be indeterminate or determinate. Now, we may say that
even differentiation in plants is open, because cells / tissues arising out of
the same meristem have different structures at maturity. The final
structure at maturity of a cell / tissue is also determined by the location of
the cell within. For example, cells positioned away from root apical
meristems differentiate as root-cap cells, while those pushed to the
periphery mature as epidermis. Can you add a few more examples of
open differentiation correlating the position of a cell to its position in an
organ?

1 5.3 DEVELOPMENT

Development is a term that includes all changes that an organism goes
through during its life cycle from germination of the seed to senescence.
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of processes which
constitute the development of a cell of a higher plant is given in Figure
15.8. It is also applicable to tissues / organs.

245