BIOLOGY

 

gene gets ‘inactivated due to insertion’ of alien DNA, and helps in
selection of recombinants.

Selection of recombinants due to inactivation of antibiotics is a
cumbersome procedure because it requires simultaneous plating
on two plates having different antibiotics. Therefore, alternative
selectable markers have been developed which differentiate
recombinants from non-recombinants on the basis of their ability
to produce colour in the presence of a chromogenic substrate. In
this, a recombinant DNA is inserted within the coding sequence of
an enzyme, |3-galactosidase. This results into inactivation of the
gene for synthesis of this enzyme, which is referred to as insertional
inactivation. The presence of a chromogenic substrate gives blue
coloured colonies if the plasmid in the bacteria does not have an
insert. Presence of insert results into insertional inactivation of the
B-galactosidase gene and the colonies do not produce any colour,
these are identified as recombinant colonies.

(iv) Vectors for cloning genes in plants and animals : You may be
surprised to know that we have learnt the lesson of transferring genes
into plants and animals from bacteria and viruses which have known
this for ages — how to deliver genes to transform eukaryotic cells and
force them to do what the bacteria or viruses want. For example,
Agrobacterium tumifaciens, a pathogen of several dicot plants is able
to deliver a piece of DNA known as ‘T-DNA’ to transform normal
plant cells into a tumor and direct these tumor cells to produce the
chemicals required by the pathogen. Similarly, retroviruses in animals
have the ability to transform normal cells into cancerous cells. A
better understanding of the art of delivering genes by pathogens in
their eukaryotic hosts has generated knowledge to transform these
tools of pathogens into useful vectors for delivering genes of interest
to humans. The tumor inducing (Ti) plasmid of Agrobacterium
tumifaciens has now been modiﬁed into a cloning vector which is no
more pathogenic to the plants but is still able to use the mechanisms
to deliver genes of our interest into a variety of plants. Similarly,
retroviruses have also been disarmed and are now used to deliver
desirable genes into animal cells. So, once a gene or a DNA fragment
has been ligated into a suitable vector it is transferred into a bacterial,
plant or animal host (where it multiplies).

1 1 .2.3 Competent Host (For Transformation with
Recombinant DNA)

Since DNA is a hydrophilic molecule, it cannot pass through cell
membranes. Why? In order to force bacteria to take up the plasmid, the
bacterial cells must first be made ‘competent’ to take up DNA. This is
done by treating them with a speciﬁc concentration of a divalent cation,
such as calcium, which increases the efﬁciency with which DNA enters

2019—2020