180

Solute
molecule

Water

 

Figure 1 1 .3

BIOLOGY

this increases the pressure potential. Pressure potential is usually
positive, though in plants negative potential or tension in the water column
in the xylem plays a major role in water transport up a stem. Pressure
potential is denoted as ‘I‘p.

Water potential of a cell is affected by both solute and pressure
potential. The relationship between them is as follows:

 

 

 

A

1 1 .2.2 Osmosis

The plant cell is surrounded by a cell membrane and a cell wall. The cell
wall is freely permeable to water and substances in solution hence is not
a barrier to movement. In plants the cells usually contain a large central
vacuole, whose contents, the vacuolar sap, contribute to the solute
potential of the cell. In plant cells, the cell membrane and the membrane
of the vacuole, the tonoplast together are important determinants of
movement of molecules in or out of the cell.

Osmosis is the term used to refer speciﬁcally to the diffusion of water across
a differentially- or selectively permeable membrane. Osmosis occurs
spontaneously in response to a driving force. The net direction and rate of osmosis
depends on both the pressure gradient and concentration gradient. Water
will move from its region of higher chemical potential (or concentration) to its
region of lower chemical potential until equilibrium is reached. At equilibrium
the two chambers should have nearly the same water potential.

You may have made a potato osmometer in your earlier classes in
school. If the potato tuber is placed in water, the water enters the cavity in
the potato tuber containing a concentrated solution of sugar due to osmosis.

Study Figure 1 1.3 in which the two chambers, A and B, containing
solutions are separated by a semi-permeable membrane.

(a) Solution of which chamber has a lower water potential?
(b) Solution of which chamber has a lower solute potential?

(c) In which direction will osmosis occur?

(d) Which solution has a higher solute
potential?

(e) At equilibrium which chamber will
have lower water potential?

0‘) If one chamber has a ‘I‘ of — 2000
kPa, and the other— 1 000 kPa, which
is the chamber that has the higher
‘I‘?

(g) What will be the direction of the
movement of water when two
solutions with ‘I‘W = 0.2 MPa and
‘I‘W= 0.1 MPa are separated by a
selectively permeable membrane?

Selectively permeable
membrane