154

BioquY

9. 12 ENZYMES

Almost all enzymes are proteins. There are some nucleic acids that behave
like enzymes. These are called ribozymes. One can depict an enzyme by a
line diagram. An enzyme like any protein has a primary structure, i.e.,
amino acid sequence of the protein. An enzyme like any protein has the
secondary and the tertiary structure. When you look at a tertiary structure
(Figure 9.4 b) you will notice that the backbone of the protein chain folds
upon itself, the chain criss-crosses itself and hence, many crevices or
pockets are made. One such pocket is the ‘active site’. An active site of an
enzyme is a crevice or pocket into which the substrate fits. Thus enzymes,
through their active site, catalyse reactions at a high rate. Enzyme catalysts
differ from inorganic catalysts in many ways, but one major difference
needs mention. Inorganic catalysts work efficiently at high temperatures
and high pressures, while enzymes get damaged at high temperatures
(say above 40°C). However, enzymes isolated from organisms who normally
live under extremely high temperatures (e. g., hot vents and sulphur
springs), are stable and retain their catalytic power even at high
temperatures (upto 80°—90°C). Thermal stability is thus an important
quality of such enzymes isolated from thermophilic organisms.

9. 12. 1 Chemical Reactions

How do we understand these enzymes? Let us first understand a chemical
reaction. Chemical compounds undergo two types of changes. A physical
change simply refers to a change in shape without breaking of bonds.
This is a physical process. Another physical process is a change in state
of matter: when ice melts into water, or when water becomes a vapour.
These are also physical processes. However, when bonds are broken and
new bonds are formed during transformation, this will be called a chemical
reaction. For example:

Ba(OH)2 + H2804 —> BaSO4 + 2H2O

is an inorganic chemical reaction. Similarly, hydrolysis of starch into
glucose is an organic chemical reaction. Rate of a physical or chemical
process refers to the amount of product formed per unit time. It can be
expressed as:

6 P
rate — —

6:

Rate can also be called velocity if the direction is specified. Rates of physical
and chemical processes are inﬂuenced by temperature among other
factors. A general rule of thumb is that rate doubles or decreases by half

2019-2020