224

 

BIOLOGY

SUMMARY

Green plants make their own food by photosynthesis. During this process carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere is taken in by leaves through stomata and used for
making carbohydrates, principally glucose and starch. Photosynthesis takes place
only in the green parts of the plants, mainly the leaves. Within the leaves, the
mesophyll cells have a large number of chloroplasts that are responsible for CO2
ﬁxation. Within the chloroplasts, the membranes are sites for the light reaction,
while the chemosynthetic pathway occurs in the stroma. Photosynthesis has two
stages: the light reaction and the carbon ﬁxing reactions. In the light reaction the
light energy is absorbed by the pigments present in the antenna, and funnelled to
special chlorophyll a molecules called reaction centre chlorophylls. There are two
photosystems, PS I and PS II. PS I has a 700 nm absorbing chlorophyll a P700
molecule at its reaction centre, while PS II has a P680 reaction cemtge that absorbs
red light at 680 nm. After absorbing light, eyctrons are exciteyl and transferred
through PS II and PS I and ﬁnally to NADéféi‘ming NADH. <{Dumvfgg’thls process a
proton gradient 1s created across the mg”? anle the thy yl\ dr‘The breakdown
of the protons gradient due to movemynt : ough thegF 04pm; oﬁthe A’IPase enzyme
releases enough energy for synth‘gs of ‘ETP Sp aﬁigg %f water molecules is
associated with PS II resulting mﬁleﬁ r gage of 02, pgétﬁns and transfer of electrons
to PS II. 3Q g? Jr «\\

In the carbon ﬁxat1o~r_%;3%l§‘ @(52 is adde " Qby‘“the enzyme, RuBisCO, to a 5-
carbon compound RuBP ﬁhata’ss‘converted to 2 ﬁglecules of 3- carbon PGA. This
is then converted to sugar by ﬁhe Calwnggygleaand the RuBP 1s regenerated. During
this process ATP and NADPH synthesised’mn the light reaction are utilised. RuBisCO
also catalyses a wasteful oxygenation reaction 1n C3 plants: photorespiration.

Some tropical plants show a special type of photosynthesis called C 4 pathway.
In these plants the ﬁrst product of CO2 ﬁxation that takes place in the mesophyll,
is a 4-carbon compound. In the bundle sheath cells the Calvin pathway is carried

out for the synthesis of carbohydrates.

 

EXERCISES

1. By looking at a plant externally can you tell whether a plant is C3 or C 4? Why and
how?

2. By looking at which internal structure of a plant can you tell whether a plant is
C3 or C 4‘5’ Explain.

3. Even though a very few cells in a C 4 plant carry out the biosynthetic — Calvin
pathway, yet they are highly productive. Can you discuss why?