280

BIOLOGY

associated with allergic reactions. Lymphocytes (20-25 per cent) are of
two major types — ‘B’ and ”1" forms. Both B and T lymphocytes are
responsible for immune responses of the body.

Platelets also called thrombocytes, are cell fragments produced from
megakaryocytes (special cells in the bone marrow). Blood normally
contains 1 ,500,00-3,500,00 platelets mm*3. Platelets can release avariety
of substances most of which are involved in the coagulation or clotting of
blood. A reduction in their number can lead to clotting disorders which
will lead to excessive loss of blood from the body.

18. 1 .3 Blood Groups

As you know, blood of human beings differ in certain aspects though it
appears to be similar. Various types of grouping of blood has been done.
Two such groupings — the ABC and Rh — are widely used all over the
world.

18.1.3.1 ABO grouping

ABO grouping is based on the presence or absence of two surface antigens
(chemicals that can induce immune response) on the RBCs namely A
and B. Similarly, the plasma of different individuals contain two natural
antibodies (proteins produced in response to antigens). The distribution
of antigens and antibodies in the four groups of blood, A. B, AB and O
are given in Table l 8. 1. You probably know that during blood transfusion,
any blood cannot be used; the blood of a donor has to be carefully matched
with the blood of a recipient before any blood transfusion to avoid severe
problems of clumping (destruction of RBC). The donor’s compatibility is
also shown in the Table 18.1.

TABLE 18.1 Blood Groups and Donor Compatibility
Blood Group Antigens on Antibodies Donor’s Group

RBCs in Plasma
A A anti-B A, O
B B anti-A B, 0
AB A, B nil AB, A, B, O
O nil anti-A, B O

From the above mentioned table it is evident that group ‘0’ blood can
be donated to persons with any other blood group and hence ‘0’ group
individuals are called ‘universal donors’. Persons with ‘AB’ group can
accept blood from persons with AB as well as the other groups of blood.
Therefore, such persons are called ‘universal recipients’.

2019-2020