TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

1 1.4. 1 Transpiration and Photosynthesis — a Compromise

Transpiration has more than one purpose; it

° creates transpiration pull for absorption and transport of plants
' supplies water for photosynthesis
° transports minerals from the soil to all parts of the plant

° cools leaf surfaces, sometimes 10 to 15 degrees, by evaporative
cooling

' maintains the shape and structure of the plants by keeping cells
turgid
An actively photosynthesising plant has an insatiable need for water.
Photosynthesis is limited by available water which can be swiftly depleted
by transpiration. The humidity of rainforests is largely due to this vast
cycling of water from root to leaf to atmosphere and back to the soil.
The evolution of the C 4 photosynthetic system is probably one of the
strategies for maximising the availability of CO2 while minimising water
loss. C 4 plants are twice as efficient as C3 plants in terms of ﬁxing carbon
dioxide (making sugar). However, a C 4 plant loses only half as much water
as a C3 plant for the same amount of CO2 ﬁxed.

1 1.5 UPTAKE AND TRANSPORT 0F MINERAL NUTRIENTS

Plants obtain their carbon and most of their oxygen from CO2 in the
atmosphere. However, their remaining nutritional requirements are
obtained from water and minerals in the soil.

1 1.5. 1 Uptake of Mineral Ions

Unlike water, all minerals cannot be passively absorbed by the roots.
Two factors account for this: (i) minerals are present in the soil as charged
particles (ions) which cannot move across cell membranes and (ii) the
concentration of minerals in the soil is usually lower than the concentration
of minerals in the root. Therefore, most minerals must enter the root by
active absorption into the cytoplasm of epidermal cells. This needs energy
in the form of ATP. The active uptake of ions is partly responsible for the
water potential gradient in roots, and therefore for the uptake of water by
osmosis. Some ions also move into the epidermal cells passively.

Ions are absorbed from the soil by both passive and active transport.
Speciﬁc proteins in the membranes of root hair cells actively pump ions
from the soil into the cytoplasms of the epidermal cells. Like all cells, the
endodermal cells have many transport proteins embedded in their plasma
membrane; they let some solutes cross the membrane, but not others.
Transport proteins of endodermal cells are control points, where a plant
adjusts the quantity and types of solutes that reach the xylem Note
that the root endodermis because of the layer of suberin has the ability to
actively transport ions in one direction only.

189