188

wmv

 

BIOLOGY

demand of agricultural produce has contributed significantly to
this pollution. Of course, we have now realised that there are problems
associated with the overuse of chemical fertilisers and there is a
large pressure to switch to organic farming — the use of biofertilisers.
Biofertilisers are organisms that enrich the nutrient quality of the soil.
The main sources of biofertilisers are bacteria, fungi and cyanobacteria.
You have studied about the nodules on the roots of leguminous plants
formed by the symbiotic association of Rhizobium. These bacteria ﬁx
atmospheric nitrogen into organic forms, which is used by the plant as
nutrient. Other bacteria can ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen while free-living in
the soil (examples Azospirillum and Azotobacter), thus enriching the
nitrogen content of the soil.

Fungi are also known to form symbiotic associations with plants
(mycorrhiza). Many members of the genus Glomus form mycorrhiza.
The fungal symbiont in these associations absorbs phosphorus from
soil and passes it to the plant. Plants having such associations show
other beneﬁts also, such as resistance to root-borne pathogens, tolerance
to salinity and drought, and an overall increase in plant growth and
development. Can you tell what advantage the fungus derives from
this association?

Cyanobacteria are autotrophic microbes widely distributed in aquatic
and terrestrial environments many of which can ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen,
e.g. Anabaena, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, etc. In paddy ﬁelds, cyanobacteria
serve as an important biofertiliser. Blue green algae also add organic matter
to the soil and increase its fertility. Currently, in our country, a number
of biofertilisers are available commercially in the market and farmers use
these regularly in their ﬁelds to replenish soil nutrients and to reduce
dependence on chemical fertilisers.

 

 

SUMMARY

Microbes are a very important component of life on earth. Not all
microbes are pathogenic. Many microbes are very useful to human
beings. We use microbes and microbially derived products almost every
day. Bacteria called lactic acid bacteria (LAB) grow in milk to convert it
into curd. The dough, which is used to make bread, is fermented by
yeast called Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Certain dishes such as idli and
dosa, are made from dough fermented by microbes. Bacteria and fungi
are used to impart particular texture, taste and ﬂavor to cheese. Microbes
are used to produce industrial products like lactic acid, acetic acid
and alcohol, which are used in a variety of processes in the industry.
Antibiotics like penicillins produced by useful microbes are used to kill
disease-causing harmful microbes. Antibiotics have played a major role
in controlling infectious diseases like diphtheria, Whooping cough and

 

 

2019-2020