38

 

BIOLOGY

to colonise in other areas. As they have sufﬁcient food reserves, young
seedlings are nourished until they are capable of photosynthesis on their
own. The hard seed coat provides protection to the young embryo. Being
products of sexual reproduction, they generate new genetic combinations
leading to variations.

Seed is the basis of our agriculture. Dehydration and dormancy of
mature seeds are crucial for storage of seeds which can be used as food
throughout the year and also to raise crop in the next season. Can you
imagine agriculture in the absence of seeds, or in the presence of seeds
which genninate straight away soon after formation and cannot be stored?

How long do the seeds remain alive after they are dispersed? This
period again varies greatly. In a few species the seeds lose Viability within
a few months. Seeds of a large number of species live for several years.
Some seeds can remain alive for hundreds of years. There are several
records of very old yet viable seeds. The oldest is that of a lupine, Lupinus
arcticus excavated from Arctic Tundra. The seed germinated and ﬂowered
after an estimated record of 10,000 years of dormancy. A recent record of
2000 years old viable seed is of the date palm, Phoenix dactylifera
discovered during the archeological excavation at King Herod’s palace
near the Dead Sea.

Aﬁer completing a brief account of sexual reproduction of ﬂowering
plants it would be worth attempting to comprehend the enormous
reproductive capacity of some ﬂowering plants by asking the following
questions: How many eggs are present in an embryo sac? How many
embryo sacs are present in an ovule? How many ovules are present in
an ovary? How many ovaries are present in a typical ﬂower? How many
ﬂowers are present on a tree? And so on...

Can you think of some plants in which fruits contain very large
number of seeds. Orchid fruits are one such category and each fruit
contain thousands of tiny seeds. Similar is the case in fruits of some
parasitic species such as Orobanche and Striga. Have you seen a tiny
seed of Ficus? How large is the tree of Ficus developed from that tiny
seed. How many billions of seeds does each Ficus tree produce? Can
you imagine any other example in which such a tiny structure can
produce such a large biomass over the years?

2.5 APOMIXIS AND POLYEMBRYONY

Although seeds, in general are the products of fertilisation, a few ﬂowering
plants such as some species of Asteraceae and grasses, have evolved a
special mechanism, to produce seeds without fertilisation, called apomixis.
What is fruit production without fertilisation called? Thus, apomixis is a
form of asexual reproduction that mimics sexual reproduction. There are
several ways of development of apomictic seeds. In some species, the
diploid egg cell is formed without reduction division and develops into
the embryo without fertilisation. More often, as in many Citrus and Mango

2019-2020