272

BIOIJOGY

Residual Volume (RV): Volume of air remaining in the lungs even after a
forcible expiration. This averages 1 100 mL to 1200 mL.

By adding up a few respiratory volumes described above, one can
derive various pulmonary capacities, which can be used in clinical
diagnosis.

Inspiratory Capacity (IC): Total volume of air a person can inspire
after a normal expiration. This includes tidal volume and inspiratory
reserve volume ( TV +IRV).

Expiratory Capacity (EC): Total volume of air a person can expire after
a normal inspiration. This includes tidal volume and expiratory reserve
volume (TV +ERV) .

Functional Residual Capacity (FRC): Volume of air that will remain in
the lungs after a normal expiration. This includes ERV+RV.

Vital Capacity (V C): The maximum volume of air a person can breathe in
after a forced expiration. This includes ERV, TV and IRV or the maximum
volume of air a person can breathe out after a forced inspiration.

Total Lung Capacity (TLC): Total volume of air accommodated in the
lungs at the end of a forced inspiration. This includes RV, ERV, TV and
IRV or vital capacity + residual volume.

17.3 EXCHANGE OF GASES

Alveoli are the primary sites of exchange of gases. Exchange of gases also
occur between blood and tissues. 02 and CO2 are exchanged in these
sites by simple diffusion mainly based on pressure / concentration
gradient. Solubility of the gases as well as the thickness of the membranes
involved in diffusion are also some important factors that can affect the
rate of diffusion.

Pressure contributed by an individual gas in a mixture of gases is
called partial pressure and is represented as p02 for oxygen and pCO2 for
carbon dioxide. Partial pressures of these two gases in the atmospheric
air and the two sites of diffusion are given in Table 1 7.1 and in
Figure 1 7.3. The data given in the table clearly indicates a concentration
gradient for oxygen from alveoli to blood and blood to tissues. Similarly,

TABLE 17. 1 Partial Pressures (in mm Hg) of Oxygen and Carbon dioxide at Different

Parts Involved in Diffusion in Comparison to those in Atmosphere

Respiratory Atmospheric Alveoli Blood Blood Tissues
Gas Air (Deoxygenated) (Oxygenated)
O2 1 59 l 04 4O 95 40
CO 0.3 40 45 4O 45

2

2019-2020