ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

the game, but unluckily for him, the minister won. The king felt that ﬁilﬁlling
the minister’s bet was so easy. He started with a single grain on
the ﬁrst square and proceeded to ﬁll the other squares following
minister’s suggested procedure, but by the time he covered half the
chess board, the king realised to his dismay that all the wheat
produced in his entire kingdom pooled together would still be
inadequate to cover all the 64 squares. Now think of a tiny
Paramecium starting with just one individual and through binary
ﬁssion, doubling in numbers every day, and imagine what a mind-
boggling population size it would reach in 64 days. (provided food
and space remain unlimited)

(ii) Logistic growth: No population of any species in nature has at its

disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth. This
leads to competition between individuals for limited resources.
Eventually, the ‘ﬁttest’ individual will survive and reproduce. The
governments of many countries have also realised this fact and
introduced various restraints with a view to limit human population
growth. In nature, a given habitat has enough resources to support
a maximum possible number, beyond which no further growth is
possible. Let us call this limit as nature’s carrying capacity (K) for
that species in that habitat.

A population growing in a habitat with limited resources show
initially a lag phase, followed by phases of acceleration and
deceleration and ﬁnally an asymptote, when the population density
reaches the carrying capacity. A plot of N in relation to time (t)
results in a sigmoid curve. This type of population growth is called
Verhulst—Pearl Logistic Growth (Figure 13.6) and is described by
the following equation:

K—N
= N —
dN/dt 1' ( K )

Where N = Population density at time t
r = Intrinsic rate of natural increase

K = Carrying capacity

Since resources for growth for most animal populations are ﬁnite
and become limiting sooner or later, the logistic growth model is
considered a more realistic one.

Gather from Government Census data the population ﬁgures
for India for the last 100 years, plot them and check which growth
pattern is evident.

13.2.3 Life History Variation

Populations evolve to maximise their reproductive ﬁtness, also called
Darwinian ﬁtness (high r value), in the habitat in which they live. Under

2019—2020

   

231