\l/

HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE (\

 

poppy plant Papaver somniferum (Figure 8.8). Generally taken by snorting
and injection, heroin is a depressant and slows down body functions.

Cannabinoids are a group of chemicals (Figure 8.9), which interact
with cannabinoid receptors present principally in the brain. Natural
cannabinoids are obtained from the inﬂorescences of the plant Cannabis
sativa (Figure 8.10). The ﬂower tops, leaves and the resin of cannabis
plant are used in various combinations to produce marijuana, hashish,
charas and ganja. Generally taken by inhalation and oral ingestion, these
are known for their effects on cardiovascular system of the body.

OH
\
O
H

Figure 8.9 Skeletal structure of Figure 8.10 Leaves of Cannabis sativa
cannabinoid molecule

Coca alkaloid or cocaine is obtained from coca
plant Erythroxylum coca, native to South America. It
interferes with the transport of the neuro—transmitter
dopamine. Cocaine, commonly called coke or crack is
usually snorted. It has a potent stimulating action on
central nervous system, producing a sense of euphoria
and increased energy. Excessive dosage of cocaine
causes hallucinations. Other well-known plants with
hallucinogenic properties are Atropa belladona and
Datura (Figure 8. 1 1). These days cannabinoids are also
being abused by some sportspersons.

Drugs like barbiturates, amphetamines,
benzodiazepines, and other similar drugs, that are
normally used as medicines to help patients cope with Figure 8. 1 1 Flowering branch of Datura
mental illnesses like depression and insomnia, are often
abused. Morphine is a very effective sedative and painkiller, and is very useful _
in patients who have undergone surgery. Several plants, fruits and seeds
having hallucinogenic properties have been used for hundreds of years in —
folk-medicine, religious ceremonies and rituals all over the globe. When these
are taken for a purpose other than medicinal use or in amounts / frequency
that impairs one’s physical, physiological or psychological functions, it
constitutes drug abuse.

 

2019—2020