146

TABLE 9.3 Some Secondary Metabolites

BIOLOGY

9.2 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY METABOLITES

The most exciting aspect of chemistry deals with isolating thousands of
compounds, small and big, from living organisms, determining their
structure and if possible synthesising them.

If one were to make a list of biomolecules, such a list would have
thousands of organic compounds including amino acids, sugars, etc.
For reasons that are given in section 9. 10, we can call these biomolecules
as ‘metabolites’. In animal tissues, one notices the presence of all such
categories of compounds shown in Figure 9.1. These are called primary
metabolites. However, when one analyses plant, fungal and microbial cells,
one would see thousands of compounds other than these called primary
metabolites, e. g. alkaloids, ﬂavonoids, rubber, essential oils, antibiotics,
coloured pigments, scents, gums, spices. These
are called secondary metabolites (Table 9.3).

«@aroiienoiﬂs, thmymﬁm While primary metabolites have identifiable

 

functions and play known roles in normal
physiologial processes, we do not at the moment,

 

 

«Imam:

understand the role or functions of all the

 

Eéééﬁﬁﬁlﬁﬂg 11"" " ' ‘

‘secondary metabolites’ in host organisms.

 

"“Ia‘m’ﬁs

However, many of them are useful to ‘human

 

 

7mm

welfare’ (e. g., rubber, drugs, spices, scents and
pigments). Some secondary metabolites have

 

 

 

 

 

ecological importance. In the later chapters and
years you will learn more about this.

9.3 BIOMACROMOLECULES

There is one feature common to all those compounds found in the acid
soluble pool. They have molecular weights ranging from 18 to around
800 daltons (Da) approximately.

The acid insoluble fraction, has only four types of organic compounds
i.e., proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides and lipids. These classes of
compounds with the exception of lipids, have molecular weights in the
range of ten thousand daltons and above. For this very reason,
biomolecules, i.e., chemical compounds found in living organisms are of
two types. One, those which have molecular weights less than one
thousand dalton and are usually referred to as micromolecules or simply
biomolecules while those which are found in the acid insoluble fraction
are called macromolecules or biomacromolecules.

The molecules in the insoluble fraction with the exception of lipids
are polymeric substances. Then why do lipids, whose molecular weights
do not exceed 800 Da, come under acid insoluble fraction, i.e.,
macromolecular fraction? Lipids are indeed small molecular weight