BIOLOGY

 

geometric fashion. If in a population of size N, the birth rates (not
total number but per capita births) are represented as b and death
rates (again, per capita death rates) as d, then the increase or
decrease in N during a unit time period t (dN/dt) will be

dN/dt= (b—d) XN
Let (b—d) =r, then
dN/dt = rN

The r in this equation is called the ‘intrinsic rate of natural increase’
and is a very important parameter chosen for assessing impacts of
any biotic or abiotic factor on population growth.

To give you some idea about the magnitude of r values, for the
Norway rat the r is 0.015, and for the ﬂour beetle it is 0.12. In
198 1, the r value for human population in India was 0.0205. Find
out what the current r value is. For calculating it, you need to
know the birth rates and death rates.

The above equation describes the exponential or geometric growth
pattern of a population (Figure 1 3.6) and results in a J -shaped curve
when we plot N in relation to time. If you are familiar with basic
calculus, you can derive the integral form of the
exponential growth equation as

Nt = NO ert
where
Nt = Population density after time t
N0 = Population density at time zero
r = intrinsic rate of natural increase
e = the base of natural logarithms (2.7 1828)

Any species growing exponentially under unlimited
resource conditions can reach enormous population
densities in a short time. Darwin showed how even
Figure 13.6 Population growth curve a slow growing animal like elephant could reach
a When responses are not enormous numbers in the absence of checks. The
limiting lhe grOWth’ mm is following is an anecdote popularly narrated to
:X‘gﬁgﬁrggé’onses are limiting demonstrate dramatically how fast a huge
the growth, plot is logistic, population could build up when growing

K is carrying capacity exponentially.

 

Population density (N)—>

Time (t) —>

The king and the minister sat for a chess game. The king, conﬁdent
2 3 0 of winning the game, was ready to accept any bet proposed by the
minister. The minister humbly said that if he won, he wanted only
some wheat grains, the quantity of which is to be calculated by placing
on the chess board one grain in Square 1, then two in Square 2,
then four in Square 3, and eight in Square 4, and so on, doubling each
time theprevious quantity ofwheat on the next square until all the 64
squares were ﬁlled. The king accepted the seemingly silly bet and started

2019—2020