170

 

BIOLOGY

Fisheries has an important place in Indian economy. It provides income
and employment to millions of ﬁshermen and farmers, particularly in the
coastal states. For many, it is the only source of their livelihood. In order
to meet the increasing demands on ﬁsheries, different techniques have
been employed to increase production. For example, through aquaculture
and pisciculture we have been able to increase the production of aquatic
plants and animals, both fresh-water and marine. Find out the difference
between pisciculture and aquaculture. This has led to the development
and ﬂourishing of the ﬁshery industry, and it has brought a lot of income
to the farmers in particular and the country in general. We now talk about
‘Blue Revolution’ as being implemented along the same lines as ‘Green
Revolution’.

9.2 PLANT BREEDING

Traditional farming can only yield a limited biomass, as food for humans
and animals. Better management practices and increase in acreage can
increase yield, but only to a limited extent. Plant breeding as a technology
has helped increase yields to a very large extent. Who in India has not
heard of Green Revolution which was responsible for our country to
not merely meet the national requirements in food production but also
helped us even to export it? Green revolution was dependent to a large
extent on plant breeding techniques for development of high-yielding and
disease resistant varieties in wheat, rice, maize, etc.

9.2. 1 What is Plant Breeding?

Plant breeding is the purposeful manipulation of plant species in order to
create desired plant types that are better suited for cultivation, give better
yields and are disease resistant. Conventional plant breeding has been
practiced for thousands of years, since the beginning of human civilisation;
recorded evidence of plant breeding dates back to 9,000- 1 1,000 years ago.
Many present-day crops are the result of domestication in ancient times.
Today, all our major food crops are derived from domesticated varieties.
Classical plant breeding involves crossing or hybridisation of pure lines,
followed by artiﬁcial selection to produce plants with desirable traits of higher
yield, nutrition and resistance to diseases. With advancements in genetics,
molecular biology and tissue culture, plant breeding is now increasingly
being carried out by using molecular genetic tools.

If we were to list the traits or characters that the breeders have tried to
incorporate into crop plants, the ﬁrst we would list would be increased
crop yield and improved quality. Increased tolerance to environmental
stresses (salinity, extreme temperatures, drought), resistance to pathogens
(viruses, fungi and bacteria) and increased tolerance to insect pests would
be on our list too.

2019—2020