BIOLOGY

the other members of population (through sexual reproduction). Allelic
(again recall the deﬁnition of alleles from Chapter 5) sequence variation
has traditionally been described as a DNA polymorphism if more than
one variant (allele) at a locus occurs in human population with a
frequency greater than 0.0 1. In simple terms, if an inheritable mutation
is observed in a population at high frequency, it is referred to as DNA
polymorphism. The probability of such variation to be observed in non-
coding DNA sequence would be higher as mutations in these sequences
may not have any immediate effect / impact in an individual’s
reproductive ability. These mutations keep on accumulating generation
after generation, and form one of the basis of variability/ polymorphism.
There is a variety of different types of polymorphisms ranging from single
nucleotide change to very large scale changes. For evolution and
speciation, such polymorphisms play very important role, and you will
study these in details at higher classes.

The technique of DNA Fingerprinting was initially developed by Alec
J effreys. He used a satellite DNA as probe that shows very high degree
of polymorphism. It was called as Variable Number of Tandem Repeats
(VNTR). The technique, as used earlier, involved Southern blot
hybridisation using radiolabelled VNTR as a probe. It included

(i) isolation of DNA,
(ii) digestion of DNA by restriction endonucleases,
(iii) separation of DNA fragments by electrophoresis,

(iv) transferring (blotting) of separated DNA fragments to synthetic
membranes, such as nitrocellulose or nylon,

(v) hybridisation using labelled VN’I‘R probe, and

(vi) detection of hybridised DNA fragments by autoradiography. A schematic
representation of DNA fingerprinting is shown in Figure 6. 1 6.

The VNTR belongs to a class of satellite DNA referred to as mini-satellite.
A small DNA sequence is arranged tandemly in many copy numbers. The
copy number varies from chromosome to chromosome in an individual.
The numbers of repeat show very high degree of polymorphism. As a
result the size of VNTR varies in size from 0.1 to
20 kb. Consequently, after hybridisation with VNTR probe, the
autoradiogram gives many bands of differing sizes. These bands give a
characteristic pattern for an individual DNA (Figure 6.16). It differs from
individual to individual in a population except in the case of monozygotic
(identical) twins. The sensitivity of the technique has been increased by
use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR—you will study about it in
Chapter 1 1). Consequently, DNA from a single cell is enough to perform
DNA fingerprinting analysis. In addition to application in forensic

2019-2020