216

 

BIOLOGY

Scientists also tried to know whether all plants have PGA as the ﬁrst
product of CO2 ﬁxation, or whether any other product was formed in
other plants. Experiments conducted over a wide range of plants led to
the discovery of another group of plants, where the ﬁrst stable product of
CO2 ﬁxation was again an organic acid, but one which had 4 carbon
atoms in it. This acid was identiﬁed to be oxaloacetic acid or 0AA. Since
then CO2 assimilation during photosynthesis was said to be of two main
types: those plants in which the ﬁrst product of CO2 ﬁxation is a C3 acid
(PGA), i.e., the C3 pathway, and those in which the ﬁrst product was a C 4
acid (0AA), i.e., the C 4 pathway. These two groups of plants showed
other associated characteristics that we will discuss later.

13.7. 1 The Primary Acceptor of CO2

Let us now ask ourselves a question that was asked by the scientists who
were struggling to understand the ‘dark reaction’. How many carbon atoms
would a molecule have which after accepting (fixing) C02, would have 3
carbons (of PGA)?

The studies very unexpectedly showed that the acceptor molecule
was a 5-carbon ketose sugar — ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). Did any
of you think of this possibility? Do not worry; the scientists also took
a long time and conducted many experiments to reach this conclusion.
They also believed that since the ﬁrst product was a C3 acid, the primary
acceptor would be a 2-carbon compound; they spent many years trying
to identify a 2-carbon compound before they discovered the 5-carbon
RuBP.

13.7.2 The Calvin Cycle

Calvin and his co-workers then worked out the whole pathway and showed
that the pathway operated in a cyclic manner; the RuBP was regenerated.
Let us now see how the Calvin pathway operates and where the sugar is
synthesised. Let us at the outset understand very clearly that the Calvin
pathway occurs in all photosynthetic plants; it does not matter whether
they have C3 or C 4 (or any other) pathways Wigure 13.8).

For ease of understanding, the Calvin cycle can be described under
three stages: carboxylation, reduction and regeneration.

l . Carboxylation — Carboxylation is the ﬁxation of CO2 into a stable organic
intermediate. Carboxylation is the most crucial step of the Calvin cycle
where CO2 is utilised for the carboxylation of RuBP. This reaction is
catalysed by the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which results in the formation
of two molecules of 3-PGA. Since this enzyme also has an oxygenation
activity it would be more correct to call it RuBP carboxylase-oxygenase
or RuBisCO.