MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

(288, 188, and 5.88), whereas the RNA polymerase III is responsible
for transcription of tRNA, 5srRNA, and snRNAs (small nuclear
RNAs). The RNA polymerase II transcribes precursor of mRNA, the
heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA).

(ii) The second complexity is that the primary transcripts contain both
the exons and the introns and are non-functional. Hence, it is
subjected to a process called splicing where the introns are removed
and exons are joined in a defined order. hnRNA undergoes
additional processing called as capping and tailing. In capping an
unusual nucleotide (methyl guanosine triphosphate) is added to
the 5'—end of hnRNA. In tailing, adenylate residues (200-300) are
added at 3'-end in a template independent manner. It is the fully
processed hnRNA, now called mRNA, that is transported out of the
nucleus for translation (Figure 6.1 1).

The significance of such complexities is now beginning to be
understood. The split— gene arrangements represent probably an ancient
feature of the genome. The presence of introns is reminiscent of antiquity,
and the process of splicing represents the dominance of RNA-world. In
recent times, the understanding of RNA and RNA-dependent processes
in the living system have assumed more importance.

6.6 GENETIC CODE

During replication and transcription a nucleic acid was copied to form
another nucleic acid. Hence, these processes are easy to conceptualise
on the basis of complementarity. The process of translation requires
transfer of genetic information from a polymer of nucleotides to synthesise
a polymer of amino acids. Neither does any complementarity exist between
nucleotides and amino acids, nor could any be drawn theoretically. There
existed ample evidences, though, to support the notion that change in
nucleic acids (genetic material) were responsible for change in amino acids
in proteins. This led to the proposition of a genetic code that could direct
the sequence of amino acids during synthesis of proteins.

If determining the biochemical nature of genetic material and the
structure of DNA was very exciting, the proposition and deciphering of
genetic code were most challenging. In a very true sense, it required
involvement of scientists from several disciplines — physicists, organic
chemists, biochemists and geneticists. It was George Gamow, a physicist,
who argued that since there are only 4 bases and if they have to code for
20 amino acids, the code should constitute a combination of bases. He
suggested that in order to code for all the 20 amino acids, the code should
be made up of three nucleotides. This was a very bold proposition, because
a permutation combination of 43 (4 X 4 X 4) would generate 64 codons;
generating many more codons than required.

Providing proof that the codon was a triplet, was a more daunting
task. The chemical method developed by Har Gobind Khorana was

2019-2020