BIOLOGY

sequenced). Another challenging task was assigning the genetic and
physical maps on the genome. This was generated using information on
polymorphism of restriction endonuclease recognition sites, and some
repetitive DNA sequences known as microsatellites (one of the applications
of polymorphism in repetitive DNA sequences shall be explained in next
section of DNA ﬁngerprinting).

6.9. 1 Salient Features of Human Genome

Some of the salient observations drawn from human genome project are
as follows:

(i) The human genome contains 3 164.7 million bp.

(ii) The average gene consists of 3000 bases, but sizes vary greatly, with
the largest known human gene being dystrophin at 2 .4 million bases.

(iii) The total number of genes is estimated at 30,000—much lower
than previous estimates of 80,000 to 1,40,000 genes. Almost all
(99.9 per cent) nucleotide bases are exactly the same in all people.

(iv) The functions are unknown for over 50 per cent of the discovered
genes.

(v) Less than 2 per cent of the genome codes for proteins.
(vi) Repeated sequences make up very large portion of the human genome.

(vii) Repetitive sequences are stretches of DNA sequences that are
repeated many times, sometimes hundred to thousand times. They
are thought to have no direct coding functions, but they shed light
on chromosome structure, dynamics and evolution.

(viii) Chromosome 1 has most genes (2968), and the Y has the fewest (23 1).

(ix) Scientists have identiﬁed about 1.4 million locations where single-
base DNA differences (SNPs — single nucleotide polymorphism,
pronounced as ‘snips’) occur in humans. This information promises
to revolutionise the processes of ﬁnding chromosomal locations for
disease-associated sequences and tracing human history.

6.9.2 Applications and Future Challenges

Deriving meaningful knowledge from the DNA sequences will deﬁne
research through the coming decades leading to our understanding of
biological systems. This enormous task will require the expertise and
creativity of tens of thousands of scientists from varied disciplines in both
the public and private sectors worldwide. One of the greatest impacts of
having the HG sequence may well be enabling a radically new approach
to biological research. In the past, researchers studied one or a few genes
at a time. With whole-genome sequences and new high-throughput
technologies, we can approach questions systematically and on a much

2019—2020