NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION

contain Nissl’s granules and are called dendrites. These
ﬁbres transmit impulses towards the cell body. The
axon is a long ﬁbre, the distal end of which is branched.
Each branch terminates as a bulb-like structure called Nissl’s granules
synaptic knob which possess synaptic vesicles
containing chemicals called neurotransmitters. The Cell body
axons transmit nerve impulses away from the cell body
to a synapse or to a neuro-muscular junction. Based Nucleus
on the number of axon and dendrites, the neurons are
divided into three types, i.e., multipolar (with one axon
and two or more dendn'tes; found in the cerebral cortex),
bipolar (with one axon and one dendrite, found in the Schwan cell
retina of eye) and unipolar (cell body with one axon
only; found usually in the embryonic stage). There are
two types of axons, namely, myelinated and non- Axon
myelinated. ’Ihe myelinated nerve ﬁbres are enveloped
with Schwann cells, which form a myelin sheath

Dendrites

Myelin
around the axon. ’Ihe gaps between two adjacent sheath
myelin sheaths are called nodes of Ranvier. Node of
Myelinated nerve ﬁbres are found in spinal and cranial Ranvier
nerves. Unmyelinated nerve ﬁbre is enclosed by a
Schwann cell that does not form a myelin sheath Axon
around the axon, and is commonly found in terminal
autonomous and the somatic neural systems. Synaptic

knob
21.3. 1 Generation and Conduction of

Nerve Impulse

Neurons are excitable cells because their membranes are in a polarised
state. Do you know why the membrane of a neuron is polarised? Different
types of ion channels are present on the neural membrane. These ion
channels are selectively permeable to different ions. When a neuron is not
conducting any impulse, i.e., resting, the axonal membrane is
comparatively more permeable to potassium ions (K+) and nearly
impermeable to sodium ions (Nat). Similarly, the membrane is
impermeable to negatively charged proteins present in the axoplasm.
Consequently, the axoplasm inside the axon contains high concentration
of K+ and negatively charged proteins and low concentration of Na“. In
contrast, the ﬂuid outside the axon contains a low concentration of K‘”, a
high concentration of Na+ and thus form a concentration gradient. These
ionic gradients across the resting membrane are maintained by the active
transport of ions by the sodium-potassium pump which transports 3
Na+ outwards for 2 K+ into the cell. As a result, the outer surface of the
axonal membrane possesses a positive charge while its inner surface

317

Figure 21.1 Structure of a neuron