CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION 333

22.2.2 The Pituitary Gland Hypothalamus

    
 

Hypothalamic

The pituitary gland is located in a bony cavity ‘ neurons

called sella tursica and is attached to
hypothalamus by a stalk (Figure 22.2). It is
divided anatomically into an adenohypophysis
and a neurohypophysis. Adenohypophysis
consists of two portions, pars distalis and pars
intermedia. The pars distalis region of pituitary,
commonly called anterior pituitary, produces
growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH),
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle

Portal circulation

stimulating hormone (FSH). Pars intermedia Posterior

secretes only one hormone called melanocyte 'i 7 pimitary

stimulating hormone (MSH). However, in

humans, the pars intermedia is almost merged Anterior

with pars distalis. Neurohypophysis (pars pituitary

nervosa) also known as posterior pituitary, stores Figure 22.2 Diagrammatic representation of

and releases two hormones called oxytocin and pituitary and its rekﬁ‘ﬁOUShiP With
hypothalamus

vasopressin, which are actually synthesised by
the hypothalamus and are transported axonally to neurohypophysis.
Over-secretion of GH stimulates abnormal growth of the body leading
to gigantism and low secretion of GH results in stunted growth resulting
in pituitary dwarﬁsm. Excess secretion of growth hormone in adults
especially in middle age can result in severe disﬁgurement (especially of
the face) called Acromegaly, which may lead to serious complications,
and premature death if unchecked. The disease is hard to diagnose in
the early stages and often goes undetected for many years, until changes
in external features become noticeable. Prolactin regulates the growth of
the mammary glands and formation of milk in them. TSH stimulates the
synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones from the thyroid gland. ACTH
stimulates the synthesis and secretion of steroid hormones called
glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex. LH and FSH stimulate gonadal
activity and hence are called gonadotrophins. In males, LH stimulates
the synthesis and secretion of hormones called androgens from testis. In
males, FSH and androgens regulate spermatogenesis. In females, LH
induces ovulation of fully mature follicles (graaﬁan follicles) and maintains
the corpus luteum, formed from the remnants of the graaﬁan follicles