BIOLOGY

Non-histone Chromosomal (NHC) proteins. In a typical nucleus, some
region of chromatin are loosely packed (and stains light) and are referred to
as euchromatin. The chromatin that is more densely packed and stains
dark are called as Heterochromatin. Euchromatin is said to be
transcriptionally active chromatin, whereas heterochromatin is inactive.

6.2 THE SEARCH FOR GENETIC MATERIAL

Even though the discovery of nuclein by Meischer and the proposition
for principles of inheritance by Mendel were almost at the same time, but
that the DNA acts as a genetic material took long to be discovered and
proven. By 1926, the quest to determine the mechanism for genetic
inheritance had reached the molecular level. Previous discoveries by
Gregor Mendel, Walter Sutton, Thomas Hunt Morgan and numerous other
scientists had narrowed the search to the chromosomes located in the
nucleus of most cells. But the question of what molecule was actually the
genetic material, had not been answered.

Transforming Principle

In 1928, Frederick Griffith, in a series of experiments with Streptococcus
pneumoniae (bacterium responsible for pneumonia), witnessed a
miraculous transformation in the bacteria. During the course of his
experiment, a living organism (bacteria) had changed in physical form.

When Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) bacteria are grown
on a culture plate, some produce smooth shiny colonies (S) while others
produce rough colonies (R). This is because the S strain bacteria have a
mucous (polysaccharide) coat, while R strain does not. Mice infected with
the S strain (virulent) die from pneumonia infection but mice infected
with the R strain do not develop pneumonia.

S strain —> Inject into mice —> Mice die

R strain —> Inject into mice —> Mice live

Grifﬁth was able to kill bacteria by heating them. He observed that
heat-killed S strain bacteria injected into mice did not kill them. When he

S strain —> Inject into mice —> Mice live
(heat-killed)

S strain
(heat-killed)
+ —> Inject into mice —> Mice die
R strain
(live)

2019—2020