312

 

BIOLOGY

this. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones and
cartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movement
through joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at these
joints vary depending on different factors. Joints have been classiﬁed into
three major structural forms, namely, ﬁbrous, cartilaginous and synovial.

Fibrous joints do not allow any movement. This type of j oint is shown
by the ﬂat skull bones which fuse end-to—end with the help of dense ﬁbrous
connective tissues in the form of sutures, to form the cranium.

In cartilaginous joints, the bones involved are joined together with
the help of cartilages. The joint between the adjacent vertebrae in the
vertebral column is of this pattern and it permits limited movements.

Synovial joints are characterised by the presence of a ﬂuid ﬁlled synovial
cavity between the articulating surfaces of the two bones. Such an arragement
allows considerable movement. These joints help in locomotion and many
other movements. Ball and socket joint (between humerus and pectoral
girdle), hinge joint (knee joint), pivot joint (between atlas and axis), gliding
joint (between the carpals) and saddle joint (between carpal and metacarpal
of thumb) are some examples.

20.5 DISORDERS 0F MUSCULAR AND SKELETAL SYSTEM

Myasthenia gravis: Auto immune disorder affecting neuromuscular
junction leading to fatigue, weakening and paralysis of skeletal muscle.

Muscular dystrophy: Progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle mostly
due to genetic disorder.

Tetany: Rapid spasms (wild contractions) in muscle due to low Ca++ in
body ﬂuid.

Arthritis: Inﬂammation of j oints.

Osteoporosis: Age-related disorder characterised by decreased bone mass
and increased chances of fractures. Decreased levels of estrogen is a
common cause.

Gout: Inﬂammation of j oints due to accumulation of uric acid crystals.

SUMMARY

Movement is an essential feature of all living beings. Protoplasmic streaming, ciliary
movements, movements of ﬁns, limbs, wings, etc., are some forms exhibited by
animals. A voluntary movement which causes the animal to change its place, is