GOOD

I
9

“ENE:

Figure 5.13 Symbols used in the human
pedigree analysis human beings, study of the family history about

 

BIOLOGY

5.7 MUTATION

Mutation is a phenomenon which results in alteration of DNA sequences
and consequently results in changes in the genotype and the phenotype
of an organism. In addition to recombination, mutation is another
phenomenon that leads to variation in DNA.

As you will learn in Chapter 6, one DNA helix runs continuously from
one end to the other in each chromatid, in a highly supercoiled form.
Therefore loss (deletions) or gain (insertion/ duplication) of a segment of
DNA, result in alteration in chromosomes. Since genes are known to be
located on chromosomes, alteration in chromosomes results in

abnormalities or aberrations. Chromosomal

Male aberrations are commonly observed in cancer cells.
In addition to the above, mutation also arise due
female to change in a single base pair of DNA. This is known
as point mutation. A classical example of such a
sex unspeciﬁed mutation is sickle cell anemia. Deletions and insertions
of base pairs of DNA, causes frame-shift mutations
affected individuals (see Chapter 6)'
The mechanism of mutation is beyond the scope
mating of this discussion, at this level. However, there are
many chemical and physical factors that induce
mating between relatives mutations. These are referred to as mutagens. UV
[consanguineous mating) radiations can cause mutations in organisms — it is a

mutagen.

parents above and

children below
(in order of birth-left to right) 5'8 GENETIC DISORDERS

parents with male child
affected with disease

ﬁve unaffected offspring

5.8. 1 Pedigree Analysis

The idea that disorders are inherited has been
prevailing in the human society since long. This was
based on the heritability of certain characteristic
features in families. After the rediscovery of Mendel’s
work the practice of analysing inheritance pattern of
traits in human beings began. Since it is evident that
control crosses that can be performed in pea plant or
some other organisms, are not possible in case of

inheritance of a particular trait provides an
alternative. Such an analysis of traits in a several of generations of a family
is called the pedigree analysis. In the pedigree analysis the inheritance
of a particular trait is represented in the family tree over generations.

In human genetics, pedigree study provides a strong tool, which is
utilised to trace the inheritance of a speciﬁc trait, abnormality or disease.
Some of the important standard symbols used in the pedigree analysis
have been shown in Figure 5.13.

As you have studied in this chapter, each and every feature in any
organism is controlled by one or the other gene located on the DNA present

2019-2020