234

Outer

Inner
mitochondrial —
membrane

  

BIOLOGY

transport system is utilised in synthesising ATP
with the help of ATP synthase (complex V). This
complex consists of two major components, F1
and F0 (Figure 14.5). The F1 headpiece is a
peripheral membrane protein complex and
contains the site for synthesis of ATP from ADP
and inorganic phosphate. F0 is an integral
membrane protein complex that forms the
channel through which protons cross the inner
membrane. The passage of protons through the
ADP Pi channel is coupled to the catalytic site of the F1
component for the production of ATP. For each
ATP produced, 2H+ passes through F0 from the

Matrix

Figure 14.5 Diagramatic presentation of ATP intermembrane space to the matrix down the
synthesis in mitochondria electrochemical proton gradient.

14.5 THE RESPIRATORY BALANCE SHEET

It is possible to make calculations of the net gain of ATP for every glucose
molecule oxidised; but in reality this can remain only a theoretical exercise.
These calculations can be made only on certain assumptions that:

’ There is a sequential, orderly pathway functioning, with one
substrate forming the next and with glycolysis, TCA cycle and ETS
pathway following one after another.

' The NADH synthesised in glycolysis is transferred into the
mitochondria and undergoes oxidative phosphorylation.

' None of the intermediates in the pathway are utilised to synthesise
any other compound.

° Only glucose is being respired — no other alternative substrates are
entering in the pathway at any of the intermediary stages.

But this ldnd of assumptions are not really valid in a living system; all
pathways work simultaneously and do not take place one after another;
substrates enter the pathways and are withdrawn from it as and when
necessary; ATP is utilised as and when needed; enzymatic rates are
controlled by multiple means. Yet, it is useful to do this exercise to
appreciate the beauty and efﬁciency of the living system in extraction
and storing energy. Hence, there can be a net gain of 38 ATP molecules
during aerobic respiration of one molecule of glucose.