BIOLOGY

Obviously, since the formation of these structures does not involve two
parents, the process involved is asexual. In some organisms, if the body
breaks into distinct pieces (fragments) each fragment grows into an
adult capable of producing offspring (e. g., Hydra). This is also a mode
of asexual reproduction called fragmentation.

You must have heard about the scourge of the water bodies or about
the ‘terror of Bengal’. This is nothing but the aquatic plant ‘Water hyacinth’
which is one of the most invasive weeds found growing wherever there is
standing water. It drains oxygen from the water, which leads to death of
fishes. You will learn more about it in Chapters 13 and 14. You may ﬁnd
it interesting to know that this plant was introduced in India because of
its beautiful ﬂowers and shape of leaves. Since it can propagate vegetatively
at a phenomenal rate and spread all over the water body in a short period
of time, it is very difﬁcult to get rid off them.

Are you aware how plants like potato, sugarcane, banana, ginger,
dahlia are cultivated? Have you seen small plants emerging from the
buds (called eyes) of the potato tuber, from the rhizomes of banana and
ginger? When you carefully try to determine the site of origin of the new
plantlets in the plants listed above, you will notice that they invariably
arise from the nodes present in the modiﬁed stems of these plants. When
the nodes come in contact with damp soil or water, they produce roots
and new plants. Similarly, adventitious buds arise from the notches
present at margins of leaves of Bryophyllum. This ability is fully exploited
by gardeners and farmers for commercial propagation of such plants.

It is interesting to note that asexual reproduction is the common method
of reproduction in organisms that have a relatively simple organisation,
like algae and fungi and that they shift to sexual method of reproduction
just before the onset of adverse conditions. Find out how sexual
reproduction enables these organisms to survive during unfavourable
conditions? Why is sexual reproduction favoured under such conditions?
Asexual (vegetative) as well as sexual modes of reproduction are exhibited
by the higher plants. On the other hand, only sexual mode of reproduction
is present in most of the animals.

1 .2 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION

Sexual reproduction involves formation of the male and female gametes,
either by the same individual or by different individuals of the opposite
sex. These gametes fuse to form the zygote which develops to form the
new organism. It is an elaborate, complex and slow process as compared
to asexual reproduction. Because of the fusion of male and female gametes,
sexual reproduction results in offspring that are not identical to the parents
or amongst themselves.

A study of diverse organisms—plants, animals or fungi—show that
though they differ so greatly in external morphology, internal structure

2019—2020