REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

Such practices should be avoided because these are dangerous both for
the young mother and the foetus. Effective counselling on the need to
avoid unprotected coitus and the risk factors involved in illegal abortions
as well as providing more health care facilities could reverse the mentioned
unhealthy trend.

4.4 SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS (STIs)

Infections or diseases which are transmitted through sexual intercourse
are collectively called sexually transmitted infections (STI) or venereal
diseases (VD) or reproductive tract infections (RTI). Gonorrhoea, syphilis,
genital herpes, chlamydiasis, genital warts, trichomoniasis, hepatitis-B
and of course, the most discussed infection in the recent years, HIV leading
to AIDS are some of the common STIs. Among these, HIV infection is
most dangerous and is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.

Some of these infections like hepatitis—B and HIV can also be
transmitted by sharing of injection needles, surgical instruments, etc.,
with infected persons, transfusion of blood, or from an infected mother to
the foetus too. Except for hepatitis-B, genital herpes and HIV infections,
other diseases are completely curable if detected early and treated
properly. Early symptoms of most of these are minor and include itching,
ﬂuid discharge, slight pain, swellings, etc., in the genital region. Infected
females may often be asymptomatic and hence, may remain undetected
for long. Absence or less signiﬁcant symptoms in the early stages of
infection and the social stigma attached to the STIs, deter the infected
persons from going for timely detection and proper treatment. This could
lead to complications later, which include pelvic inﬂammatory diseases
(PID), abortions, still births, ectopic pregnancies, infertility or even cancer
of the reproductive tract. STIs are a major threat to a healthy society.
Therefore, prevention or early detection and cure of these diseases are
given prime consideration under the reproductive health-care
programmes. Though all persons are vulnerable to these infections, their
incidences are reported to be very high among persons in the age group
of 15-24 years — the age group to which you also belong. There is no
reason to panic because prevention is possible. One could be free of these
infections by following the simple principles given below:

(i) Avoid sex with unknown partners / multiple partners.
(ii) Always try to use condoms during coitus.

(iii) In case of doubt, one should go to a qualiﬁed doctor for early
detection and get complete treatment if diagnosed with infection.

4. 5 INFERTILITY

A discussion on reproductive health is incomplete without a mention of
infertility. A large number of couples all over the world including India
are infertile, i.e., they are unable to produce children inspite of unprotected

2019—2020

 

63