ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

(iii) Migrate: The organism can move away temporarily from the
stressful habitat to a more hospitable area and return when stressful
period is over. In human analogy, this strategy is like a person
moving from Delhi to Shimla for the duration of summer. Many
animals, particularly birds, during winter undertake long— distance
migrations to more hospitable areas. Every winter the famous
Keolado National Park (Bharatpur) in Raj asthan host thousands of
migratory birds coming from Siberia and other extremely cold
northern regions.

(iv) Suspend: In bacteria, fungi and lower plants, various kinds of thick-
walled spores are formed which help them to survive unfavourable
conditions — these germinate on availability of suitable environment.
In higher plants, seeds and some other vegetative reproductive
structures serve as means to tide over periods of stress besides helping
in dispersal — they germinate to form new plants under favourable
moisture and temperature conditions. They do so by reducing their
metabolic activity and going into a state of ‘dormancy’.

In animals, the organism, if unable to migrate, might avoid the
stress by escaping in time. The familiar case of bears going into
hibernation during winter is an example of escape in time. Some
snails and fish go into aestivation to avoid summer—related
problems-heat and dessication. Under unfavourable conditions
many zooplankton species in lakes and ponds are known to enter
diapause, a stage of suspended development.

13. 1.3 Adaptations

While considering the various alternatives available to organisms for
coping with extremes in their environment, we have seen that some are
able to respond through certain physiological adjustments while others
do so behaviourally (migrating temporarily to a less stressful habitat).
These responses are also actually, their adaptations. So, we can say that
adaptation is any attribute of the organism (morphological, physiological,
behavioural) that enables the organism to survive and reproduce in its
habitat. Many adaptations have evolved over a long evolutionary time
and are genetically ﬁxed. In the absence of an external source of water,
the kangaroo rat in North American deserts is capable of meeting all its
water requirements through its internal fat oxidation (in which water is
a by product). It also has the ability to concentrate its urine so that
minimal volume of water is used to remove excretory products.

Many desert plants have a thick cuticle on their leaf surfaces and
have their stomata arranged in deep pits (sunken) to minimise water loss
through transpiration. They also have a special photosynthetic pathway
(CAM) that enables their stomata to remain closed during day time. Some
desert plants like Opuntia, have no leaves — they are reduced to spines—

and the photosynthetic function is taken over by the ﬂattened stems.

2019-2020