ANIMAL KINGDOM

Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e. g., Torpedo) and
some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are
cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack
the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes
are separate. In males pelvic ﬁns bear claspers. They
have internal fertilisation and many of them are
viviparous.

Examples: Scoliodon (Dog ﬁsh), Pristis (Saw ﬁsh),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).

4.2.11.3 Class - Osteichthyes

It includes both marine and fresh water ﬁshes with bony
endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is
mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of
gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid / ctenoid scales. Air bladder
is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is two-
chambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and
development is direct.

Examples: Marine — Exocoetus (Flying fish),
H ippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater — Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium — Betta
(Fighting ﬁsh), Pterophyllum (Angel ﬁsh).

4.2.1 1.4 Class - Amphibia

As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life),
amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial
habitats (Figure 4.2 1). Most of them have two pairs of
limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may
be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist
(without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum
represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and
reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called
cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by
gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is three-
chambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is external. They are oviparous and development
is indirect.

Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless
amphibia).

201 9-2020

57

   

(a) (b)

Figure 4.20 Examples of Bony fishes :
(a) Hippocampus (b) Catla

 

(b)

Figure 4.21 Examples of Amphibia :
(a) Salamandra
(b) Rana