54

    
 

(b)

Figure 4.14 Examples of

Echinodermata :

(a) Asterias
(b) Ophiura

Proboscis

 

Figure 4. 15 Balanoglossus

 

BIOLOGY

They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect
development.

Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia
(Cuttleﬁsh), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil ﬁsh), Aplysia (Sea-
hare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).

4.2.9 Phylum — Echinodermata

These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles
and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
4. 14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae
are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and
coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth
on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the
presence of water vascular system which helps in
locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.

Examples: Asten‘as (Star ﬁsh), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon
(Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle star).

4.2. 10 Phylum — Hemichordata

Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under
phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum
under non-Chordata. Hemichordates have a rudimentary
structure in the collar region called stomochord, a structure
similar to notochord.

This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like
marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They
are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an
anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4. 15).
Circulatory system is of open type. Respiration takes place
through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.

Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.

4.2. 1 1 Phylum — Chordata

Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally
characterised by the presence of a notochord. a dorsal