BIOLOGY

genetic material, but DNA being more stable is preferred for storage of
genetic information. For the transmission of genetic information, RNA

is better.

6.3 RNA WORLD

From foregoing discussion, an immediate question becomes evident —
which is the ﬁrst genetic material? It shall be discussed in detail in the
chapter on chemical evolution, but brieﬂy, we shall highlight some of the
facts and points.

RNA was the ﬁrst genetic material. There is now enough evidence to
suggest that essential life processes (such as metabolism, translation,

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6.6 Watson-Crick model for

semiconservative
replication

DNA

splicing, etc.), evolved around RNA. RNA used to act as
a genetic material as well as a catalyst (there are some
important biochemical reactions in living systems that
are catalysed by RNA catalysts and not by protein
enzymes). But, RNA being a catalyst was reactive and
hence unstable. Therefore, DNA has evolved from RNA
with chemical modiﬁcations that make it more stable.
DNA being double stranded and having complementary
strand further resists changes by evolving a process of

repair.

6.4 REPLICATION

While proposing the double helical structure for DNA,
Watson and Crick had immediately proposed a scheme
for replication of DNA. To quote their original statement
that is as follows:

“It has not escaped our notice that the speciﬁc
pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a
possible copying mechanism for the genetic material”
(Watson and Crick, 1953).

The scheme suggested that the two strands would
separate and act as a template for the synthesis of new
complementary strands. After the completion of
replication, each DNA molecule would have one
parental and one newly synthesised strand. This
scheme was termed as semiconservative DNA
replication (Figure 6.6).

6.4. 1 The Experimental Proof

It is now proven that DNA replicates semiconservatively. It was shown ﬁrst in
Escherichia coli and subsequently in higher organisms, such as plants

2019—2020