EVOLUTION

organs. He gave the examples of Giraffes who in an attempt to forage
leaves on tall trees had to adapt by elongation of their necks. As they
passed on this acquired character of elongated neck to succeeding
generations, Giraffes, slowly, over the years, came to acquire long necks.
Nobody believes this conjecture any more.

Is evolution a process or the result of a process? The world we see,
inanimate and animate, is only the success stories of evolution. When we
describe the story of this world we describe evolution as a process. On the
other hand when we describe the story of life on earth, we treat evolution
as a consequence of a process called natural selection. We are still not
very clear whether to regard evolution and natural selection as processes
or end result of unknown processes.

It is possible that the work of Thomas Malthus on populations
inﬂuenced Darwin. Natural selection is based on certain observations
which are factual. For example, natural resources are limited, populations
are stable in size except for seasonal ﬂuctuation, members of a population
vary in characteristics (infact no two individuals are alike) even though
they look superﬁcially similar, most of variations are inherited etc. The
fact that theoretically population size will grow exponentially if everybody
reproduced maximally (this fact can be seen in a growing bacterial
population) and the fact that population sizes in reality are limited, means
that there had been competition for resources. Only some survived and
grew at the cost of others that could not ﬂourish. The novelty and brilliant
insight of Darwin was this: he asserted that variations, which are heritable
and which make resource utilisation better for few (adapted to habitat
better) will enable only those to reproduce and leave more progeny. Hence
for a period of time, over many generations, survivors will leave more
progeny and there would be a change in population characteristic and
hence new forms appear to arise.

7.6 MECHANISM OF EVOLUTION

What is the origin of this variation and how does speciation occur? Even
though Mendel had talked of inheritable 'factors' inﬂuencing phenotype,
Darwin either ignored these observations or kept silence. In the ﬁrst decade
of twentieth century, Hugo deVries based on his work on evening primrose
brought forth the idea of mutations — large difference arising suddenly in
a population. He believed that it is mutation which causes evolution and
not the minor variations (heritable) that Darwin talked about. Mutations
are random and directionless while Darwinian variations are small and
directional. Evolution for Darwin was gradual while deVries believed
mutation caused speciation and hence called it saltation (single step
large mutation). Studies in population genetics, later, brought out
some clarity.

2019—2020

 

135