18

0°
0%}:1. °
’0 .°

Cocci

3"

 

BIOLOGY

in their walls while the green plants had a cellulosic cell wall. When such
characteristics were considered, the fungi were placed in a separate
kingdom — Kingdom Fungi. All prokaryotic organisms were grouped
together under Kingdom Monera and the unicellular eukaryotic organisms
were placed in Kingdom Protista. Kingdom Protista has brought together
Chlamydomonas, Chlorella (earlier placed in Algae within Plants and both
having cell walls) with Paramoecium and Amoeba (which were earlier placed
in the animal kingdom which lack cell wall). It has put together organisms
which, in earlier classiﬁcations, were placed in different kingdoms. This
happened because the criteria for classiﬁcation changed. This kind of
changes will take place in future too depending on the improvement in our
understanding of characteristics and evolutionary relationships. Over time,
an attempt has been made to evolve a classiﬁcation system which reﬂects
not only the morphological, physiological and reproductive similarities,
but is also phylogenetic, i.e., is based on evolutionary relationships.

In this chapter we will study characteristics of Kingdoms Monera,
Protista and Fungi of the Whittaker system of classiﬁcation. The Kingdoms
Plantae and Animalia, commonly referred to as plant and animal
kingdoms, respectively, will be dealt separately in chapters 3 and 4.

2. 1 KINGDOM MONERA

Bacteria are the sole members of the Kingdom Monera. They are the most
abundant micro-organisms. Bacteria occur almost everywhere. Hundreds
of bacteria are present in a handful of soil. They also live in extreme habitats
such as hot springs, deserts, snow and deep oceans where very few other
life forms can survive. Many of them live in or on other organisms as
parasites.

Bacteria are grouped under four categories based on their shape: the
spherical Coccus (pl.: cocci), the rod-shaped Bacillus (pl.: bacilli), the
comma-shaped Vibrium (pl.: vibrio) and the spiral Spirillum (pl.: spirilla)
(Figure 2.1).

   

Spore Flagellum

Bacilli

Figure 2.1 Bacteria of different shapes