BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION

23

called conidia or sporangiospores or zoospores, and sexual reproduction
is by oospores, ascospores and basidiospores. The various spores are
produced in distinct structures called fruiting bodies. The sexual cycle

involves the following three steps:

(i) Fusion of protoplasms between two motile or non-motile gametes

called plasmogamy.
(ii) Fusion of two nuclei called karyogamy.
(iii) Meiosis in zygote resulting in haploid spores.

When a fungus reproduces sexually, two haploid
hyphae of compatible mating types come together and
fuse. In some fungi the fusion of two haploid cells
immediately results in diploid cells (2n). However, in other
fungi (ascomycetes and basidiomycetes), an intervening
dikaryotic stage (n + n, i.e., two nuclei per cell) occurs;
such a condition is called a dikaryon and the phase is
called dikaryophase of fungus. Later, the parental nuclei
fuse and the cells become diploid. The fungi form fruiting
bodies in which reduction division occurs, leading to
formation of haploid spores.

The morphology of the mycelium, mode of spore
formation and fruiting bodies form the basis for the
division of the kingdom into various classes.

2.3. 1 Phycomycetes

Members of phycomycetes are found in aquatic habitats
and on decaying wood in moist and damp places or as
obligate parasites on plants. The mycelium is aseptate
and coenocytic. Asexual reproduction takes place by
zoospores (motile) or by aplanospores (non-motile). These
spores are endogenously produced in sporangium. A
zygospore is formed by fusion of two gametes. These
gametes are similar in morphology (isogamous) or
dissimilar (anisogamous or oogamous). Some common
examples are Mucor (Figure 2.5a), Rhizopus (the bread
mould mentioned earlier) and Albugo (the parasitic fungi
on mustard).

2.3.2 Ascomycetes

Commonly known as sac-fungi, the ascomycetes are mostly
multicellular, e. g., Penicillium or rarely unicellular, e. g., yeast
(Saccharomyces). They are saprophytic, decomposers,
parasitic or coprophilous (growing on dung). Mycelium

201 9-2020

 

Figure 2.5 Fungi: (a) Mucor
(b) Aspergillus (c) Agaricus