PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS

 

incident light beyond a point causes the breakdown of chlorophyll and a
decrease in photosynthesis.

13.10.2 Carbon dioxide Concentration

Carbon dioxide is the major limiting factor for photosynthesis. The
concentration of CO2 is very low in the atmosphere (between 0.03 and
0.04 per cent). Increase in concentration upto 0.05 per cent can cause an
increase in CO2 ﬁxation rates; beyond this the levels can become damaging
over longer periods.

The C3 and C 4 plants respond differently to CO2 concentrations. At
low light conditions neither group responds to high CO2 conditions. At
high light intensities, both C3 and C 4 plants show increase in the rates of
photosynthesis. What is important to note is that the C 4 plants show
saturation at about 360 ulL‘1 while C3 responds to increased CO2
concentration and saturation is seen only beyond 450 ulL'l. Thus, current
availability of CO2 levels is limiting to the C3 plants.

The fact that C3 plants respond to higher 002 concentration by
showing increased rates of photosynthesis leading to higher productivity
has been used for some greenhouse crops such as tomatoes and bell
pepper. They are allowed to grow in carbon dioxide enriched atmosphere
that leads to higher yields.

1 3. l 0. 3 Temperature

The dark reactions being enzymatic are temperature controlled. Though
the light reactions are also temperature sensitive they are affected to a
much lesser extent. The C 4 plants respond to higher temperatures and
show higher rate of photosynthesis while C3 plants have a much lower
temperature optimum.

The temperature optimum for photosynthesis of different plants also
depends on the habitat that they are adapted to. Tropical plants have a
higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate
climates.

13. 10.4 Water

Even though water is one of the reactants in the light reaction, the effect of
water as a factor is more through its effect on the plant, rather than directly
on photosynthesis. Water stress causes the stomata to close hence reducing
the CO2 availability. Besides, water stress also makes leaves wilt, thus,
reducing the surface area of the leaves and their metabolic activity as well.