SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

Pollination by wind is more common
amongst abiotic pollinations. Wind pollination
also requires that the pollen grains are light
and non-sticky so that they can be
transported in wind currents. They often
possess well-exposed stamens (so that the
pollens are easily dispersed into wind currents,
Figure 2.10) and large often-feathery stigma
to easily trap air-borne pollen grains. Wind-
pollinated ﬂowers often have a single ovule in
each ovary and numerous ﬂowers packed into
an inﬂorescence; a familiar example is the corn
cob — the tassels you see are nothing but the
stigma and style which wave in the wind to
trap pollen grains. Wind-pollination is quite
common in grasses.

Pollination by water is quite rare in
ﬂowering plants and is limited to about 30
genera, mostly monocotyledons. As against
this, you would recall that water is a regular
mode of transport for the male gametes among
the lower plant groups such as algae,
bryophytes and pteridophytes. It is believed,
particularly for some bryophytes and Figure 2- 10 A wind-pollinated plant 3110‘”ng
pteridophytes, that their distribution is limited compaCt inﬂorecence and well—

exposed stamens

because of the need for water for the transport

of male gametes and fertilisation. Some

examples of water pollinated plants are Vallisneria and Hydrilla which
grow in fresh water and several marine sea-grasses such as Zostera. Not
all aquatic plants use water for pollination. In a majority of aquatic plants
such as water hyacinth and water lily, the ﬂowers emerge above the level
of water and are pollinated by insects or wind as in most of the land
plants. In Vallisneria, the female ﬂower reach the surface of water by the
long stalk and the male ﬂowers or pollen grains are released on to the
surface of water. They are carried passively by water currents (Figure
2.1 1a); some of them eventually reach the female ﬂowers and the stigma.
In another group of water pollinated plants such as seagrasses, female
ﬂowers remain submerged in water and the pollen grains are released
inside the water. Pollen grains in many such species are long, ribbon like
and they are carried passively inside the water; some of them reach the
stigma and achieve pollination. In most of the water-pollinated species,
pollen grains are protected from wetting by a mucilaginous covering.

Both wind and water pollinated ﬂowers are not very colourful and do
not produce nectar. What would be the reason for this?

 

2019-2020