PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT 249

Auxins also induce parthenocarpy, e. g., in
tomatoes. They are widely used as herbicides.
2, 4—D, widely used to kill dicotyledonous
weeds, does not affect mature
monocotyledonous plants. It is used to prepare
weed-free lawns by gardeners. Auxin also
controls xylem differentiation and helps in cell
division.

1 5. 4.3.2 Gibberellins
Gibberellins are another kind of promotory
PGR. There are more than 100 gibberellins

reported from widely different organisms such
as fungi and higher plants. They are denoted

 

Figure 15.11 Apical dominance in plants :

as GAI. GAZ. GA3 and so on. However. (a) A plant with apical bud intact
Gibberellic acid (GA?) was one of the first (blAplal’lt with apical bud removed
gibberellins to be discovered and remains the Note the growth of lateral buds into

most intensively studied form. All GAS are branChes after decapitation

acidic. They produce a wide range of

physiological responses in the plants. Their ability to cause an increase
in length of axis is used to increase the length of grapes stalks. Gibberellins,
cause fruits like apple to elongate and improve its shape. They also delay
senescence. Thus, the fruits can be left on the tree longer so as to extend
the market period. GA3 is used to speed up the malting process in brewing
industry.

Sugarcane stores carbohydrate as sugar in their stems. Spraying
sugarcane crop with gibberellins increases the length of the stem, thus
increasing the yield by as much as 20 tonnes per acre.

Spraying juvenile conifers with GAS hastens the maturity period, thus
leading to early seed production. Gibberellins also promotes bolting
(intemode elongation just prior to ﬂowering) in beet, cabbages and many
plants with rosette habit.

1 5.4.3.3 Cytokinins

Cytokinins have speciﬁc effects on cytokinesis, and were discovered as
kinetin (a modiﬁed form of adenine, a purine) from the autoclaved herring
sperm DNA. Kinetin does not occur naturally in plants. Search for natural
substances with cytokinin-like activities led to the isolation of zeatin from
corn-kernels and coconut milk. Since the discovery of zeatin, several
naturally occurring cytokinins, and some synthetic compounds with cell
division promoting activity, have been identiﬁed. Natural cytokinins are
synthesised in regions where rapid cell division occurs, for example, root
apices, developing shoot buds, young fruits etc. It helps to produce new