10

Kingdom

Phylum or Division

T

Class

T

Order

T

Family

T

Genus

T

Species

Figure 1.1 Taxonomic
categories
s h o W i n g
hierarchial
arrangement
in ascending
order

BioquY

1.3.4 Order

You have seen earlier that categories like species, genus and
families are based on a number of similar characters. Generally,
order and other higher taxonomic categories are identiﬁed based
on the aggregates of characters. Order being a higher category,
is the assemblage of families which exhibit a few similar
characters. The similar characters are less in number as
compared to different genera included in a family. Plant families
like Convolvulaceae, Solanaceae are included in the order
Polymoniales mainly based on the ﬂoral characters. The animal
order, Carnivora, includes families like Felidae and Canidae.

1.3.5 Class

This category includes related orders. For example, order Primata
comprising monkey, gorilla and gibbon is placed in class
Mammalia along with order Carnivora that includes animals like
tiger, cat and dog. Class Mammalia has other orders also.

1 .3.6 Phylum

Classes comprising animals like ﬁshes, amphibians, reptiles, birds
along with mammals constitute the next higher category called
Phylum. All these, based on the common features like presence
of notochord and dorsal hollow neural system, are included in
phylum Chordata. In case of plants, classes with a few similar
characters are assigned to a higher category called Division.

1 .3.7 Kingdom

All animals belonging to various phyla are assigned to the
highest category called Kingdom Animalia in the classification
system of animals. The Kingdom Plantae, on the other hand, is
distinct, and comprises all plants from various divisions.
Henceforth, we will refer to these two groups as animal and
plant kingdoms.

The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom have been
shown in ascending order starting with species in Figure 1.1.
These are broad categories. However, taxonomists have also
developed sub-categories in this hierarchy to facilitate more
sound and scientific placement of various taxa.

Look at the hierarchy in Figure 1 . 1. Can you recall the basis
of arrangement? Say, for example, as we go higher from species
to kingdom, the number of common characteristics goes on

201 9-2020