ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

natural aging of a lake may span thousands of years. However, pollutants
from man’s activities like efﬂuents from the industries and homes can
radically accelerate the aging process. This phenomenon has been called
Cultural or Accelerated Eutrophication. During the past century, lakes
in many parts of the earth have been severely eutrophied by sewage and
agricultural and industrial wastes. The prime contaminants are nitrates
and phosphates, which act as plant nutrients. They overstimulate the
growth of algae, causing unsightly scum and unpleasant odours, and
robbing the water of dissolved oxygen Vital to other aquatic life. At the
same time, other pollutants ﬂowing into a lake may poison whole
populations of ﬁsh, whose decomposing remains further deplete the
water’s dissolved oxygen content. In such fashion, a lake can literally
choke to death.

Heated (thermal) wastewaters ﬂowing out of electricity-generating units,
e.g., thermal power plants, constitute another important category of
pollutants. Thermal wastewater eliminates or reduces the number of
organisms sensitive to high temperature, and may enhance the growth of
plants and ﬁsh in extremely cold areas but, only after causing damage to
the indigenous ﬂora and fauna.

16.2.2 A Case Study of Integrated Waste Water Treatment

Wastewater including sewage can be treated in an integrated manner, by
utilising a mix of artiﬁcial and natural processes. An example of such an
initiative is the town of Arcata, situated along the northern coast of
California. Collaborating with biologists from the Humboldt
State University, the townspeople created an integrated waste water
treatment process within a natural system. The cleaning occurs in two
stages — (a) the conventional sedimentation, ﬁltering and chlorine
treatments are given. After this stage, lots of dangerous pollutants like
dissolved heavy metals still remain. To combat this, an innovative
approach was taken and (b) the biologists developed a series of six
connected marshes over 60 hectares of marshland. Appropriate plants,
algae, fungi and bacteria were seeded into this area, which neutralise,
absorb and assimilate the pollutants. Hence, as the water ﬂows through
the marshes, it gets puriﬁed naturally.

The marshes also constitute a sanctuary, with a high level of
biodiversity in the form of ﬁshes, animals and birds that now reside there.
A citizens group called Friends of the Arcata Marsh (FOAM) are responsible
for the upkeep and safeguarding of this wonderful project. .

All this time, we have assumed that removal of wastes requires water,
i.e., the creation of sewage. But what if water is not necessary to dispose
off human waste, like excreta? Can you imagine the amount of water that
one can save if one didn’t have to ﬂush the toilet? Well, this is already a
reality. Ecological sanitation is a sustainable system for handling human

2019—2020

277