SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

varieties some of the nucellar cells surrounding the embryo sac start
dividing, protrude into the embryo sac and develop into the embryos. In
such species each ovule contains many embryos. Occurrence of more
than one embryo in a seed is referred to as polyembryony. Take out

some seeds of orange and squeeze them. Observe the many embryos of

dijferent sizes and shapes from each seed. Count the number of embryos
in each seed. What would be the genetic nature of apomictic embryos?
Can they be called clones?

Hybrid varieties of several of our food and vegetable crops are being
extensively cultivated. Cultivation of hybrids has tremendously increased
productivity. One of the problems of hybrids is that hybrid seeds have
to be produced every year. If the seeds collected from hybrids are sown,
the plants in the progeny will segregate and do not maintain hybrid
characters. Production of hybrid seeds is costly and hence the cost of
hybrid seeds become too expensive for the farmers. If these hybrids are
made into apomicts, there is no segregation of characters in the hybrid
progeny. Then the farmers can keep on using the hybrid seeds to raise
new crop year after year and he does not have to buy hybrid seeds every
year. Because of the importance of apomixis in hybrid seed industry,
active research is going on in many laboratories around the world to
understand the genetics of apomixis and to transfer apomictic genes
into hybrid varieties.

 

 

SUMMARY

Flowers are the seat of sexual reproduction in angiosperms. In the ﬂower,
androecium consisting of stamens represents the male reproductive
organs and gynoecium consisting of pistils represents the female
reproductive organs.

A typical anther is bilobed, dithecous and tetrasporangiate. Pollen
grains develop inside the microsporangia. Four wall layers, the
epidermis, endothecium, middle layers and the tapetum surround the
microsporangium. Cells of the sporogenous tissue lying in the centre of
the microsporangium, undergo meiosis (microsporogenesis) to form
tetrads of microspores. Individual microspores mature into pollen grains.

Pollen grains represents the male gametophytic generation. The
pollen grains have a two-layered wall, the outer exine and inner intine.
The exine is made up of sporopollenin and has germ pores. Pollen grains
may have two cells (a vegetative cell and generative cell) or three cells (a
vegetative cell and two male gametes) at the time of shedding.

The pistil has three parts — the stigma, style and the ovary. Ovules
are present in the ovary. The ovules have a stalk called funicle, protective
integument(s), and an opening called micropyle. The central tissue is
the nueellus in which the archesporium differentiates. A cell of the
archesporium, the megaspore mother cell divides meiotically and one of
the megaspores forms the embryo sac (the female gametophyte). The
mature embryo sac is 7-celled and 8-nucleate. At the micropylar end is

 

 

2019-2020

 

 

"\va

 

9