BIOLOGY

5.3. 1 Law of Independent Assortment

In the dihybrid cross (Figure 5.7), the phenotypes round, yellow;
wrinkled, yellow; round, green and wrinkled, green appeared in the
ratio 9:3:3: 1. Such a ratio was observed for several pairs of characters
that Mendel studied.

The ratio of 9:3:3: 1 can be derived as a combination series of 3 yellow:
1 green, with 3 round : 1 wrinkled. This derivation can be written
as follows:

(3 Round : 1 Wrinkled) (3 Yellow : 1 Green) = 9 Round, Yellow : 3
Wrinkled, Yellow: 3 Round, Green : 1 Wrinkled, Green

Based upon such observations on dihybrid crosses (crosses between
plants differing in two traits) Mendel proposed a second set of generalisations
that we call Mendel’s Law of Independent Assortment. The law states that
‘when two pairs of traits are combined in a hybrid, segregation of one pair
of characters is independent of the other pair of characters’.

The Punnett square can be effectively used to understand the
independent segregation of the two pairs of genes during meiosis and
the production of eggs and pollen in the F1 RrYy plant. Consider the
segregation of one pair of genes R and r. Fifty per cent of the gametes
have the gene R and the other 50 per cent have r. Now besides each
gamete having either R or r, it should also have the allele Y or y. The
important thing to remember here is that segregation of 50 per cent R
and 50 per cent r is independent from the segregation of 50 per cent
Y and 50 per cent y. Therefore, 50 per cent of the r bearing gametes
has Y and the other 50 per cent has y. Similarly, 50 per cent of the R
bearing gametes has Y and the other 50 per cent has y. Thus there are
four genotypes of gametes (four types of pollen and four types of eggs).
The four types are RY, Ry, rYand ry each with a frequency of 25 per
cent or 1 /4th of the total gametes produced. When you write down the
four types of eggs and pollen on the two sides of a Punnett square it is
very easy to derive the composition of the zygotes that give rise to the
F2 plants (Figure 5.7). Although there are 1 6 squares how many
different types of genotypes and phenotypes are formed? Note them
down in the format given.

Can you, using the Punnett square data work out the genotypic ratio
at the F2 stage and ﬁll in the format given? Is the genotypic ratio
also 9:3:3zl?

l S.No. Genotypes found in F2 Their expected Phenotypes I

5.3.2 Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance

Mendel published his work on inheritance of characters in 1865
but for several reasons, it remained unrecognised till 1900. Firstly,

2019-2020