BIOLOGY

into an outer layer called ectoderm and an inner layer called endoderm. A
mesoderm soon appears between the ectoderm and the endoderm. These
three layers give rise to all tissues (organs) in adults. It needs to be mentioned
here that the inner cell mass contains certain cells called stem cells which
have the potency to give rise to all the tissues and organs.

What are the major features of embryonic development at various
months of pregnancy? The human pregnancy lasts 9 months. Do you
know for how many months pregnancy last in dogs, elephants, cats?
Find out. In human beings, after one month of pregnancy, the embryo’s
heart is formed. The ﬁrst sign of growing foetus may be noticed by listening
to the heart sound carefully through the stethoscope. By the end of the
second month of pregnancy, the foetus develops limbs and digits. By the
end of 12 weeks (ﬁrst trimester), most of the major organ systems are
formed, for example, the limbs and external genital organs are well-
developed. The ﬁrst movements of the foetus and appearance of hair on
the head are usually observed during the ﬁfth month. By the end of about
24 weeks (end of second trimester), the body is covered with ﬁne hair,
eye-lids separate, and eyelashes are formed. By the end of nine months
of pregnancy, the foetus is fully developed and is ready for delivery.

3.7 PARTURITION AND LACTATION

The average duration of human pregnancy is about 9 months
which is called the gestation period. Vigorous contraction of the uterus at
the end of pregnancy causes expulsion/ delivery of the foetus. This process
of delivery of the foetus (childbirth) is called parturition. Parturition is
induced by a complex neuroendocrine mechanism. The signals for
parturition originate from the fully developed foetus and the placenta
which induce mild uterine contractions called foetal ejection reﬂex. This
triggers release of oxytocin from the maternal pituitary. Oxytocin acts on
the uterine muscle and causes stronger uterine contractions, which in
turn stimulates further secretion of oxytocin. The stimulatory reﬂex between
the uterine contraction and oxytocin secretion continues resulting in
stronger and stronger contractions. This leads to expulsion of the baby
out of the uterus through the birth canal — parturition. Soon after the
infant is delivered, the placenta is also expelled out of the uterus. What do
you think the doctors inject to induce delivery?

The mammary glands of the female undergo differentiation during
pregnancy and starts producing milk towards the end of pregnancy by
the process called lactation. This helps the mother in feeding the new-
born. The milk produced during the initial few days of lactation is called
colostrum which contains several antibodies absolutely essential to
develop resistance for the new-born babies. Breast-feeding during the
initial period of infant growth is recommended by doctors for bringing up
a healthy baby.

2019-2020