SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

plant — cannot complete their life cycles without each other. The moth
deposits its eggs in the locule of the ovary and the ﬂower, in turn, gets
pollinated by the moth. The larvae of the moth come out of the eggs as
the seeds start developing.

Why don’t you observe some flowers of the following plants (or any
others available to you): Cucumber, Mango, Peepal, Coriander, Papaya,
Onion, Labia, Cotton, Tobacco, Rose, Lemon, Eucalyptus, Banana? Try to
find out which animals visit them and whether they could be
pollinators. You’ll have to patiently observe the ﬂowers over a few days
and at different times of the day. You could also try to see whether there
is any correlation in the characteristics of a ﬂower to the animal that
visits it. Carefully observe if any of the visitors come in contact with the
anthers and the stigma as only such visitors can bring about pollination.
Many insects may consume pollen or the nectar without bringing about
pollination. Such floral visitors are referred to as pollen/ nectar robbers.
You may or may not be able to identijy the pollinators, but you will surely
enjoy your efforts!

Outbreeding Devices : Majority of ﬂowering plants produce hermaphrodite
ﬂowers and pollen grains are likely to come in contact with the stigma of
the same ﬂower. Continued self-pollination result in inbreeding depression.
Flowering plants have developed many devices to discourage self-
pollination and to encourage cross-pollination. In some species, pollen
release and stigma receptivity are not synchronised. Either the pollen is
released before the stigma becomes receptive or stigma becomes receptive
much before the release of pollen. In some other species, the anther and
stigma are placed at different positions so that the pollen cannot come in
contact with the stigma of the same ﬂower. Both these devices prevent
autogamy. The third device to prevent inbreeding is self-incompatibility.
This is a genetic mechanism and prevents self-pollen (from the same ﬂower
or other ﬂowers of the same plant) from fertilising the ovules by inhibiting
pollen germination or pollen tube growth in the pistil. Another device to
prevent self-pollination is the production of unisexual ﬂowers. If both male
and female ﬂowers are present on the same plant such as castor and maize
(monoecious), it prevents autogamy but not geitonogamy. In several species
such as papaya, male and female ﬂowers are present on different plants,
that is each plant is either male or female (dioecy). This condition prevents
both autogamy and geitonogamy.

Pollen-pistil Interaction : Pollination does not guarantee the transfer
of the right type of pollen (compatible pollen of the same species as the
stigma). Often, pollen of the wrong type, either from other species or from
the same plant (if it is self-incompatible), also land on the stigma. The
pistil has the ability to recognise the pollen, whether it is of the right type
(compatible) or of the wrong type (incompatible). If it is of the right type,
the pistil accepts the pollen and promotes post-pollination events that

2019-2020

 

31