BIOLOGY

1.2 DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD

If you look around you will see a large variety of living organisms, be it
potted plants, insects, birds, your pets or other animals and plants. There
are also several organisms that you cannot see with your naked eye but
they are all around you. If you were to increase the area that you make
observations in, the range and variety of organisms that you see would
increase. Obviously, if you were to visit a dense forest, you would probably
see a much greater number and kinds of living organisms in it. Each
different kind of plant, animal or organism that you see, represents a
species. The number of species that are known and described range
between 1 .7- 1.8 million. This refers to biodiversity or the number and
types of organisms present on earth. We should remember here that as
we explore new areas, and even old ones, new organisms are continuously
being identiﬁed.

As stated earlier, there are millions of plants and animals in the world;
we know the plants and animals in our own area by their local names.
These local names would vary from place to place, even within a country.
Probably you would recognise the confusion that would be created if we
did not ﬁnd ways and means to talk to each other, to refer to organisms
we are talking about.

Hence, there is a need to standardise the naming of living organisms
such that a particular organism is known by the same name all over the
world. This process is called nomenclature. Obviously, nomenclature or
naming is only possible when the organism is described correctly and we
know to what organism the name is attached to. This is identiﬁcation.

In order to facilitate the study, number of scientists have established
procedures to assign a scientiﬁc name to each known organism. This is
acceptable to biologists all over the world. For plants, scientiﬁc names are
based on agreed principles and criteria, which are provided in International
Code for Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN). You may ask, how are animals
named? Animal taxonomists have evolved International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature (ICZN). The scientiﬁc names ensure that each organism
has only one name. Description of any organism should enable the people
(in any part of the world) to arrive at the same name. They also ensure
that such a name has not been used for any other known organism.

Biologists follow universally accepted principles to provide scientiﬁc
names to known organisms. Each name has two components — the
Generic name and the speciﬁc epithet. This system of providing a name
with two components is called Binomial nomenclature. This naming
system given by Carolus Linnaeus is being practised by biologists all
over the world. This naming system using a two word format was found
convenient. Let us take the example of mango to understand the way of