14 BIOLOGY

Flora, manuals, monographs and catalogues are some other means
of recording descriptions. They also help in correct identiﬁcation. Flora
contains the actual account of habitat and distribution of plants of a
given area. These provide the index to the plant species found in a
particular area. Manuals are useful in providing information for
identiﬁcation of names of species found in an area. Monographs contain
information on any one taxon.

SUMMARY

The living world is rich in variety. Millions of plants and animals have been
identiﬁed and described but a large number still remains unknown. The very
range of organisms in terms of size, colour, habitat, physiological and
morphological features make us seek the defining characteristics of living
organisms. In order to facilitate the study of kinds and diversity of organisms,
biologists have evolved certain rules and principles for identiﬁcation, nomenclature
and classiﬁcation of organisms. The branch of knowledge dealing with these aspects
is referred to as taxonomy. The taxonomic studies of various species of plants
and animals are useful in agriculture, forestry, industry and in general for knowing
our bio-resources and their diversity. The basics of taxonomy like identiﬁcation,
naming and classiﬁcation of organisms are universally evolved under international
codes. Based on the resemblances and distinct differences, each organism is
identiﬁed and assigned a correct scientiﬁc/ biological name comprising two words
as per the binomial system of nomenclature. An organism represents / occupies a
place or position in the system of classiﬁcation. There are many categories / ranks
and are generally referred to as taxonomic categories or taxa. All the categories
constitute a taxonomic hierarchy.

Taxonomists have developed a variety of taxonomic aids to facilitate
identiﬁcation, naming and classiﬁcation of organisms. These studies are carried
out from the actual specimens which are collected from the ﬁeld and preserved as
referrals in the form of herbaria, museums and in botanical gardens and zoological
parks. It requires special techniques for collection and preservation of specimens
in herbaria and museums. Live specimens, on the other hand, of plants and
animals, are found in botanical gardens or in zoological parks. Taxonomists also
prepare and disseminate information through manuals and monographs for
further taxonomic studies. Taxonomic keys are tools that help in identiﬁcation
based on characteristics.