234

(ii)

 

BIOLOGY

predators. The Monarch butterﬂy is highly distasteful to its predator
(bird) because of a special chemical present in its body.
Interestingly, the butterﬂy acquires this chemical during its
caterpillar stage by feeding on a poisonous weed.

For plants, herbivores are the predators. Nearly 25 per cent of
all insects are known to be phytophagous (feeding on plant sap
and other parts of plants). The problem is particularly severe for
plants because, unlike animals, they cannot run away from their
predators. Plants therefore have evolved an astonishing variety of
morphological and chemical defences against herbivores. Thorns
(Acacia, Cactus) are the most common morphological means of
defence. Many plants produce and store chemicals that make the
herbivore sick when they are eaten, inhibit feeding or digestion,
disrupt its reproduction or even kill it. You must have seen the
weed Calotropis growing in abandoned fields. The plant produces
highly poisonous cardiac glycosides and that is why you never see
any cattle or goats browsing on this plant. Awide variety of chemical
substances that we extract from plants on a commercial scale
(nicotine, caffeine, quinine, strychnine, opium, etc.,) are produced
by them actually as defences against grazers and browsers.
Competition: When Darwin spoke of the struggle for existence and
survival of the ﬁttest in nature, he was convinced that interspeciﬁc
competition is a potent force in organic evolution. It is generally
believed that competition occurs when closely related species
compete for the same resources that are limiting, but this is not
entirely true. Firstly, totally unrelated species could also compete
for the same resource. For instance, in some shallow South
American lakes, Visiting ﬂamingoes and resident fishes compete for
their common food, the zooplankton in the lake. Secondly,
resources need not be limiting for competition to occur; in
interference competition, the feeding efﬁciency of one species might
be reduced due to the interfering and inhibitory presence of the
other species, even if resources (food and space) are abundant.
Therefore, competition is best deﬁned as a process in which the
ﬁtness of one species (measured in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate
of increase) is signiﬁcantly lower in the presence of another species.
It is relatively easy to demonstrate in laboratory experiments, as
Gause and other experimental ecologists did, when resources are
limited the competitively superior species will eventually eliminate
the other species, but evidence for such competitive exclusion
occurring in nature is not always conclusive. Strong and persuasive
circumstantial evidence does exist however in some cases. The
Abingdon tortoise in Galapagos Islands became extinct within a
decade after goats were introduced on the island, apparently due
to the greater browsing efﬁciency of the goats. Another evidence for

2019-2020