PLANT KINGDOM

them. Food is stored as complex carbohydrates, which may be in the
form of laminarin or mannitol. The vegetative cells have a cellulosic wall
usually covered on the outside by a gelatinous coating of algin. The
protoplast contains, in addition to plastids, a centrally located vacuole
and nucleus. The plant body is usually attached to the substratum by a
holdfast, and has a stalk, the stipe and leaf like photosynthetic organ —
the frond. Vegetative reproduction takes place by fragmentation. Asexual
reproduction in most brown algae is by biﬂagellate zoospores that are
pear-shaped and have two unequal laterally attached ﬂagella.

Sexual reproduction may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous.
Union of gametes may take place in water or within the oogonium
(oogamous species). The gametes are pyriform (pear-shaped) and bear
two laterally attached ﬂagella. The common forms are Ectocarpus, Dictyota,
Laminaria, Sargassum and Fucus (Figure 3.1b).

3. 1 .3 Rhodophyceae

The members of rhodophyceae are commonly called red algae because of
the predominance of the red pigment, r-phycoerythrin in their body. Majority
of the red algae are marine with greater concentrations found in the warmer
areas. They occur in both well-lighted regions close to the surface of water
and also at great depths in oceans where relatively little light penetrates.

The red thalli of most of the red algae are multicellular. Some of them
have complex body organisation. The food is stored as ﬂoridean starch
which is very similar to amylopectin and glycogen in structure.

The red algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation. They
reproduce asexually by non-motile spores and sexually by non-motile

TABLE 3.1 Divisions of Algae and their Main Characteristics

Classes Common Major Stored Cell Wall Flagellar
Name Pigments Food Number and
Position of
Insertions
Chlorophyceae Green Chlorophyll Starch Cellulose 2-8, equal,
algae a, b apical
Phaeophyceae Brown Chlorophyll Mannitol, Cellulose 2, unequal,
algae a, c, laminarin and algin lateral
fucoxanthin
Rhodophyceae Red Chlorophyll Floridean Cellulose, Absent
algae a, d, starch pectin and
phycoerythrin poly
sulphate
esters

2019-2020

33

Habitat

Fresh water,
brackish water,
salt water

Fresh water
(rare) brackish
water, salt
water

Fresh water
(some),
brackish
water, salt
water (most)