MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

because of the requirement of the origin of 5’
replication that a piece of DNA if needed to be
propagated during recombinant DNA procedures,
requires a vector. The vectors provide the origin of
replication.

Further, not every detail of replication is
understood well. In eukaryotes, the replication of
DNA takes place at S—phase of the cell-cycle. The
replication of DNA and cell division cycle should be
highly coordinated. A failure in cell division after Continuous
DNA replication results into polyploidy(a synthesis
chromosomal anomaly). You will learn the detailed
nature of origin and the processes occurring at this
site, in higher classes.

    

The process of copying genetic information from one
strand of the DNA into RNA is termed as
transcription. Here also, the principle of
complementarity governs the process of transcription, except the adenosine
complements now forms base pair with uracil instead of thymine. However,
unlike in the process of replication, which once set in, the total DNA of an
organism gets duplicated, in transcription only a segment of DNA and
only one of the strands is copied into RNA. This necessitates defining the
boundaries that would demarcate the region and the strand of DNA that
would be transcribed.

Why both the strands are not copied during transcription has the
simple answer. First, if both strands act as a template, they would code
for RNA molecule with different sequences (Remember complementarity
does not mean identical), and in turn, if they code for proteins, the sequence
of amino acids in the proteins would be different. Hence, one segment of
the DNA would be coding for two different proteins, and this would
complicate the genetic information transfer machinery. Second, the two
RNA molecules if produced simultaneously would be complementary to
each other, hence would form a double stranded RNA. This would prevent
RNA from being translated into protein and the exercise of transcription
would become a futile one.

6.5. 1 Transcription Unit

A transcription unit in DNA is deﬁned primarily by the three regions in
the DNA:

(i) A Promoter
(ii) The Structural gene
(iii) ATerminator

2019—2020

Newly synthesised \
6.5 TRANSCRIPTION , strands

 

   
  
    

Template DNA
(parental strands)

Discontinuous
synthesis

3/

Figure 6.8 Replicating Fork

107