116

  

 

BIOLOGY

7.5 FROGs

Frogs can live both on land and in freshwater and belong to class
Amphibia of phylum Chordata. The most common species of frog found
in India is Rana tigrina.

They do not have constant body temperature i.e., their body
temperature varies with the temperature of the environment. Such animals
are called cold blooded or poikilotherms. You might have also noticed
changes in the colour of the frogs while they are in grasses and on dry
land. They have the ability to change the colour to hide them from their
enemies (camouﬂage). This protective coloration is called mimicry. You
may also know that frogs are not seen during peak summer and winter.
During this period they take shelter in deep burrows to protect them
from extreme heat and cold. This is known as summer sleep (aestivation)
and winter sleep (hibernation) respectively.

7 . 5 . 1 Morphology

Have you ever touched the skin of frog? The skin is smooth and slippery
due to the presence of mucus. The skin is always maintained in a moist
condition. The colour of dorsal side of body is generally olive green with
dark irregular spots. On the ventral side the skin is uniformly pale yellow.
The frog never drinks water but absorb it through the skin.

Body of a frog is divisible into head and trunk (Figure 7 . 19). A neck
and tail are absent. Above the mouth, a pair of nostrils is present. Eyes
are bulged and covered by a nictitating membrane that protects them

while in water. On either side of eyes a membranous
Head tympanum (ear) receives sound signals. The
forelimbs and hind limbs help in swimming,
walking, leaping and burrowing. The hind limbs end
in five digits and they are larger and muscular than
fore limbs that end in four digits. Feet have webbed
digits that help in swimming. Frogs exhibit sexual
Fore 11ml) dimorphism. Male frogs can be distinguished by the
presence of sound producing vocal sacs and also a
Hind limb copulatory pad on the ﬁrst digit of the fore limbs

which are absent in female frogs.

Eye

Figure 7.19 External features of frog

7.5.2 Anatomy

The body cavity of frogs accommodate different organ systems such as
digestive, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, excretory and reproductive
systems with well developed structures and functions (Figure 7 .20).
The digestive system consists of alimentary canal and digestive glands.
The alimentary canal is short because frogs are carnivores and hence the
length of intestine is reduced. The mouth opens into the buccal cavity that