276

 

BIOLOGY

Occupational Respiratory Disorders: In certain industries, especially
those involving grinding or stone-breaking, so much dust is produced
that the defense mechanism of the body cannot fully cope with the
situation. Long exposure can give rise to inﬂammation leading to ﬁbrosis
(proliferation of ﬁbrous tissues) and thus causing serious lung damage.
Workers in such industries should wear protective masks.

SUMMARY

Cells utilise oxygen for metabolism and produce energy along with substances
like carbon dioxide which is harmful. Animals have evolved different mechanisms
for the transport of oxygen to the cells and for the removal of carbon dioxide from
there. We have a well developed respiratory system comprising two lungs and
associated air passages to perform this function.

The ﬁrst step in respiration is breathing by which atmospheric air is taken in
(inspiration) and the alveolar air is relegeél‘nut (expiration) Exchange of O2 and
CO2 between deoxygenated blood and alve'qh, transpoit of these gases throughout
the2 body by blood, exchange 0&0?" d 6202 betweenrth’e oxygenated blood and
tissues and utilisation of O 2b3f the cell‘s (cellular respiratlon) are the other steps
involved. ‘7 r. .. ‘

Inspiration and exprnatlmn
between the atmosphere a‘itld the alvedll-
intercostals and diaphragm Volumes‘ ref air involved in these activities can be
estimated with therhejpl of spirometer and are of clinical signiﬁcance.

Exchange of 62 arfd CO2 at the’alYeoll and tissues occur by diffusion. Rate of
diffusion 1s dependent on the‘pa’rrtlal pressure gradients of 02 (p02) and CO2 (pCO2 ),
their solubility as well as thel‘vthickness of the diffusion surface. These factors in
our body facilitate d1ffus1on of 02 from the alveoli to the deoxygenated blood as
well as from the oxy enated blood2 to the tissues. The factors are favourable for the
diffusion of CO2 in? e/eppOSIte direction, 1. e., from tissues to alveoli.

Oxygen 1s transported mainly as oxyhaemoglobin. In the alveoli where p02 is
higher, 02 gets bound to haemoglobin which is easily dissociated at the tissues
where p02 is low and pCO2 and H’“ concentration are high. Nearly 7 0 per cent of
carbon dioxide is transported as bicarbonate (HCOQ with the help of the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. 20-25 per cent of carbon dioxide is carried by haemoglobin
as carbamino-haemoglobin. In the tissues where pCO2 is high, it gets bound to
blood whereas in the alveoli where pCO2 is low and p02 is high, it gets removed
from the blood.

 

  
 
  
 

Respiratory rhythm is maintained by the respiratory centre in the medulla
region of brain. A pneumotaxic centre in the pons region of the brain and a
chemosensitive area in the medulla can alter respiratory mechanism.