THE LIVING WORLD

organism in various categories? The basic requirement is the knowledge
of characters of an individual or group of organisms. This helps in
identifying similarities and dissimilarities among the individuals of the
same kind of organisms as well as of other kinds of organisms.

1 .3. 1 Species

Taxonomic studies consider a group of individual organisms with
fundamental similarities as a species. One should be able to distinguish
one species from the other closely related species based on the distinct
morphological differences. Let us consider Mangifera indica, Solanum
tuberosum (potato) and Panthera leo (lion). All the three names, indica,
tuberosum and leo, represent the speciﬁc epithets, while the ﬁrst words
Mangifera, Solanum and Panthera are genera and represents another
higher level of taxon or category. Each genus may have one or more than
one speciﬁc epithets representing different organisms, but having
morphological similarities. For example, Panthera has another speciﬁc
epithet called tigris and Solanum includes species like nigrum and
melongena. Human beings belong to the species sapiens which is
grouped in the genus Homo. The scientiﬁc name thus, for human being,
is written as Homo sapiens.

1.3.2 Genus

Genus comprises a group of related species which has more characters
in common in comparison to species of other genera. We can say that
genera are aggregates of closely related species. For example, potato and
brinjal are two different species but both belong to the genus Solanum
Lion (Panthera leo), leopard (P. pardus) and tiger (P. tigris) with several
common features, are all species of the genus Panthera. This genus differs
from another genus Felis which includes cats.

1 .3.3 Family

The next category, Family, has a group of related genera with still less
number of similarities as compared to genus and species. Families are
characterised on the basis of both vegetative and reproductive features of
plant species. Among plants for example, three different genera Solanum,
Petunia and Datura are placed in the family Solanaceae. Among animals
for example, genus Panthera, comprising lion, tiger, leopard is put along
with genus, Felis (cats) in the family Felidae. Similarly, if you observe the
features of a cat and a dog, you will ﬁnd some similarities and some
differences as well. They are separated into two different families — Felidae
and Canidae, respectively.