REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

by scientists at Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI) in Lucknow, India?
Better awareness about sex related matters, increased number of medically
assisted deliveries and better post-natal care leading to decreased maternal
and infant mortality rates, increased number of couples with small
families, better detection and cure of STDs and overall increased medical
facilities for all sex-related problems, etc. all indicate improved reproductive
health of the society.

4.2 POPULATION STABILISATION AND BIRTH CONTROL

In the last century an all-round development in various ﬁelds signiﬁcantly
improved the quality of life of the people. However, increased health
facilities along with better living conditions had an explosive impact on
the growth of population. The world population which was around
2 billion (2000 million) in 1900 rocketed to about 6 billion by 2000 and
7.2 billion in 201 1. A similar trend was observed in India too. Our
population which was approximately 350 million at the time of our
independence reached close to the billion mark by 2000 and crossed
1.2 billion in May 20 1 1. A rapid decline in death rate, maternal mortality
rate (MMR) and infant mortality rate (IMR) as well as an increase in
number of people in reproducible age are probable reasons for this.
Through our Reproductive Child Health (RCH) programme, though we
could bring down the population growth rate, it was only marginal.
According to the 201 1 census report, the population growth rate was
less than 2 per cent, i.e., 20 / 1000 /year, a rate at which our population
could increase rapidly. Such an alarming growth rate could lead to an
absolute scarcity of even the basic requirements, i.e., food, shelter and
clothing, in spite of signiﬁcant progress made in those areas. Therefore,
the government was forced to take up serious measures to check this
population growth rate.

The most important step to overcome this problem is to motivate smaller
families by using various contraceptive methods. You might have seen
advertisements in the media as well as posters / bills, etc., showing a happy
couple with two children with a slogan Hum Do H amare Do (we two, our
two). Many couples, mostly the young, urban, working ones have even
adopted an ‘one child norm’. Statutory raising of marriageable age of the
female to 1 8 years and that of males to 2 1 years, and incentives given to
couples with small families are two of the other measures taken to tackle
this problem. Let us describe some of the commonly used contraceptive
methods, which help prevent unwanted pregnancies.

An ideal contraceptive should be user-friendly, easily available,
effective and reversible with no or least side-effects. It also should in no
way interfere with the sexual drive, desire and / or the sexual act of the
user. Awide range of contraceptive methods are presently available which
could be broadly grouped into the following categories, namely
Natural/Traditional, Barrier, IUDs, Oral contraceptives, Injectables,
Implants and Surgical methods.

2019-2020