BIOMOLECULES

for every 10°C change in either direction. Catalysed reactions proceed at
rates vastly higher than that of uncatalysed ones. When enzyme catalysed
reactions are observed, the rate would be vastly higher than the same but
uncatalysed reaction. For example

Carbonic anhydrase
CO2 + H20 H2CO3

carbon dioxide water carbonic acid

In the absence of any enzyme this reaction is very slow, with about
200 molecules of H2CO3 being formed in an hour. However, by using the
enzyme present within the cytoplasm called carbonic anhydrase, the
reaction speeds dramatically with about 600,000 molecules being formed
every second. The enzyme has accelerated the reaction rate by about 10
million times. The power of enzymes is incredible indeed!

There are thousands of types of enzymes each catalysing a unique
chemical or metabolic reaction. A multistep chemical reaction, when each
of the steps is catalysed by the same enzyme complex or different enzymes,
is called a metabolic pathway. For example,

Glucose —> 2 Pyruvic acid
C H O + 02—) 2C3H‘1 O3+2H20

6126

is actually a metabolic pathway in which glucose becomes pyruvic acid
through ten different enzyme catalysed metabolic reactions. When you
study respiration in Chapter 14 you will study these reactions. At this
stage you should know that this very metabolic pathway with one or two
additional reactions gives rise to a variety of metabolic end products. In
our skeletal muscle, under anaerobic conditions, lactic acid is formed.
Under normal aerobic conditions, pyruvic acid is formed. In yeast, during
fermentation, the same pathway leads to the production of ethanol
(alcohol). Hence, in different conditions different products are possible.

9.12.2 How do Enzymes bring about such High Rates of
Chemical Conversions?

To understand this we should study enzymes a little more. We have already
understood the idea of an ‘active site’. The chemical or metabolic conversion
refers to a reaction. The chemical which is converted into a product is
called a ‘substrate’. Hence enzymes, i.e. proteins with three dimensional
structures including an ‘active site’, convert a substrate (8) into a product
(P). Symbolically, this can be depicted as:

S—>P

It is now understood that the substrate ‘8’ has to bind the enzyme at
its ‘active site’ within a given cleft or pocket. The substrate has to diffuse

201 93-2020

155