STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION

You may have seen TV news or read newspaper—
reports about the ‘bird ﬂu virus’ which created a scare in
the country and drastically affected egg and chicken
consumption. Find out more about it and discuss whether
the panic reaction was justified. How can we prevent the
spread of the ﬂu in case some chicken are infected?

9. 1.2 Animal Breeding

Breeding of animals is an important aspect of animal
husbandry. Animal breeding aims at increasing the yield
of animals and improving the desirable qualities of the
produce. For what kind of characters would we breed
animals? Would the selection of characters differ with
the choice of animals?

What do we understand by the term ‘breed’? A group
of animals related by descent and similar in most characters
like general appearance, features, size, conﬁguration, etc.,
are said to belong to a breed. Find out the names of some
common breeds of cattle and poultry in the farms of your
area.

When breeding is between animals of the same breed it
is called inbreeding, while crosses between different breeds
are called outbreeding.

Inbreeding : Inbreeding refers to the mating of more

closely related individuals within the same breed for 4-

6 generations. The breeding strategy is as follows — superior males and
superior females of the same breed are identiﬁed and mated in pairs.
The progeny obtained from such matings are evaluated and superior
males and females among them are identiﬁed for further mating. A
superior female, in the case of cattle, is the cow or buffalo that produces
more milk per lactation. On the other hand, a superior male is the bull,
which gives rise to superior progeny as compared to those of other
males.

Try to recollect the homozygous purelines developed by Mendel as
discussed in Chapter 5. A similar strategy is used for developing purelines
in cattle as was used in case of peas. Inbreeding increases homozygosity.
Thus inbreeding is necessary if we want to evolve a pureline in any animal.
Inbreeding exposes harmful recessive genes that are eliminated by selection.
It also helps in accumulation of superior genes and elimination of less
desirable genes. Therefore, this approach, where there is selection at each
step, increases the productivity of inbred population. However, continued
inbreeding, especially close inbreeding, usually reduces fertility and even
productivity. This is called inbreeding depression. Whenever this becomes
a problem, selected animals of the breeding population should be mated

2019-2020

(b)

Figure 9.1 Improved breed of

cattle and chickens
(a) Jersey (b) Leghorn

I67