<1.

 

‘L/

\‘MNV

 

BIOLOGY

 

 

 

SUMMARY

The origin of life on earth can be understood only against the
background of origin of universe especially earth. Most scientists
believe chemical evolution, i.e., formation of biomolecules preceded
the appearance of the first cellular forms of life. The subsequent events
as to what happened to the first form of life is a conjectured story
based on Darwinian ideas of organic evolution by natural selection.
Diversity of life forms on earth has been changing over millions of
years. It is generally believed that variations in a population result in
variable fitness. Other phenomena like habitat fragmentation and
genetic drift may accentuate these variations leading to appearance
of new species and hence evolution. Homologr is accounted for by the
idea of branching descent. Study of comparative anatomy, fossils and
comparative biochemistry provides evidence for evolution. Among the
stories of evolution of individual species, the story of evolution of
modern man is most interesting and appears to parallel evolution of
human brain and language.

 

 

 

EXERCISES

1. Explain antibiotic resistance observed in bacteria in light of Darwinian

selection theory.

2. Find out from newspapers and popular science articles any new fossil

discoveries or controversies about evolution.
3. Attempt giving a clear deﬁnition of the term species.

4. Try to trace the various components of human evolution (hint: brain

size and function, skeletal structure, dietary preference, etc.)

5. Find out through internet and popular science articles whether animals

other than man has self-consciousness.

6. List 10 modern-day animals and using the internet resources link it to

a corresponding ancient fossil. Name both.
7. Practise drawing various animals and plants.

9°

Describe one example of adaptive radiation.
9. Can we call human evolution as adaptive radiation?

10. Using various resources such as your school Library or the internet
and discussions with your teacher, trace the evolutionary stages of

any one animal, say horse.

 

 

2019-2020