STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION

All the above examples involve sources of resistance genes that are in
the same crop species, which has to be bred for disease resistance, or in a
related wild species. Transfer of resistance genes is achieved by sexual
hybridisation between the target and the source plant followed by
selection.

9.2.3 Plant Breeding for Developing Resistance
to Insect Pests

Another major cause for large scale destruction of crop plant and crop
produce is insect and pest infestation. Insect resistance in host crop plants
may be due to morphological, biochemical or physiological characteristics.
Hairy leaves in several plants are associated with resistance to insect pests,
e. g, resistance to j assids in cotton and cereal leaf beetle in wheat. In wheat,
solid stems lead to non-preference by the stem sawﬂy and smooth leaved
and nectar-less cotton varieties do not attract bollworms. High aspartic
acid, low nitrogen and sugar content in maize leads to resistance to maize
stem borers.

Breeding methods for insect pest resistance involve the same steps as
those for any other agronomic trait such as yield or quality and are as
discussed earlier. Sources of resistance genes may be cultivated varieties,
germplasm collections of the crop or wild relatives.

Some released crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
insect pest resistance are given in Table 9.2.

 

Table 9.2
I Crop Variety Insect Pests
Brassica Pusa Gaurav Aphids
(rapeseed mustard)
Flat bean Pusa Sem 2, Jassids, aphids and
Pusa Sem 3 fruit borer

 

Okra (Bhindi) Pusa Sawani Shoot and Fruit borer
Pusa A-4

9.2.4 Plant Breeding for Improved Food Quality

More than 840 million people in the world do not have adequate food to
meet their daily food and nutritional requirements. A far greater number—
three billion people — suffer from micronutrient, protein and vitamin
deﬁciencies or ‘hidden hunger’ because they cannot afford to buy enough
fruits, vegetables, legumes, fish and meat. Diets lacking essential
micronutrients — particularly iron, Vitamin A, iodine and zinc — increase
the risk for disease, reduce lifespan and reduce mental abilities.

2019—2020

 

I75