PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

Thus, growth, differentiation and development are very closely related
events in the life of a plant. Broadly, development is considered as the
sum of growth and differentiation. Development in plants (i.e., both growth
and differentiation) is under the control of intrinsic and extrinsic factors.
The former includes both intracellular (genetic) or intercellular factors
(chemicals such as plant growth regulators) while the latter includes light,
temperature, water, oxygen, nutrition, etc.

15.4 PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS

15.4. 1 Characteristics

The plant growth regulators (PGRs) are small, simple molecules of diverse
chemical composition. They could be indole compounds (indole-3-acetic
acid, 1AA); adenine derivatives (Ne-furfurylamino purine, kinetin),
derivatives of carotenoids (abscisic acid, ABA); terpenes (gibberellic acid,
GA3) or gases (ethylene, CZH4). Plant growth regulators are variously
described as plant growth substances, plant hormones or phytohormones
in literature.

The PGRs can be broadly divided into two groups based on their
functions in a living plant body. One group of PGRs are involved in growth
promoting activities, such as cell division, cell enlargement, pattern
formation, tropic growth, ﬂowering, fruiting and seed formation. These
are also called plant growth promoters, e.g., auxins, gibberellins and
cytokinins. The PGRs of the other group play an important role in plant
responses to wounds and stresses of biotic and abiotic origin. They are
also involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as dormancy
and abscission. ’Ihe PGR abscisic acid belongs to this group. The gaseous
PGR, ethylene, could ﬁt either of the groups, but it is largely an inhibitor
of grth activities.

15.4.2 The Discovery of Plant Growth Regulators

Interestingly, the discovery of each of the ﬁve
major groups of PGRs have been accidental.
All this started with the observation of Charles
Darwin and his son Francis Darwin when they
observed that the coleoptiles of canary grass
responded to unilateral illumination by
growing towards the light source
(phototropism). After a series of experiments,
it was concluded that the tip of coleoptile was
the site of transmittable inﬂuence that caused

 

E] 13 P
a b c

d

247

 

the bending of the entire coleoptile (Figure Figure 15.10 Experiment used to demonstrate

1 5. 10). Auxin was isolated by F.W. Went from

tips of coleoptiles of oat seedlings. direction of light

that tip of the coleoptile is the
source of auxin. Arrows indicate