CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION

The stages through which a cell passes from one division to the next is called
the cell cycle. Cell cycle is divided into two phases called (i) Interphase — a
period of preparation for cell division, and (ii) Mitosis (M phase) — the actual
period of cell division. Interphase is further subdivided into G1, S and G2. G1
phase is the period when the cell grows and carries out normal metabolism.
Most of the organelle duplication also occurs during this phase. S phase marks
the phase of DNA replication and chromosome duplication. G2 phase is the
period of cytoplasmic growth. Mitosis is also divided into four stages namely
prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase. Chromosome condensation
occurs during prophase. Simultaneously, the centrioles move to the opposite
poles. The nuclear envelope and the nucleolus disappear and the spindle
ﬁbres start appearing. Metaphase is marked by the alignment of chromosomes
at the equatorial plate. During anaphase the centromeres divide and the
chromatids start moving towards the two opposite poles. Once the chromatids
reach the two poles, the chromosomal elongation starts, nucleolus and the
nuclear membrane reappear. This stage is called the telophaise. ‘ Nuclear
division is then followed by the cytoplasmic d1v1s10n and is callé‘di'cytoklnes1s

Mitosis thus, is the equational division i Gill ch the chromosome number of

    

Meiosis is divided into two ph se ..
division the homologous chromosomes pair orm bivalents, and undergo crossing
over. Meiosis I has a long prophase, which‘ is divided further into ﬁve phases.

These are leptotene, zygotene, pachytene diplotene and diakinesis. During
metaphase I the bivalents arrange on the equatorial plate. This is followed by
anaphase I in which homologous chromosomes move to the opposite poles with
both their chromatids. Each pole receives half the chromosome number of the
parent cell. In telophase I, the nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear. Meiosis
II is similar to mitosis. During anaphase II the sister chromatids separate. Thus at
the end of meiosis four haploid cells are formed.

EXERCISES

1. What is the average cell cycle span for a mammalian cell?
2. Distinguish cytokinesis from karyokinesis.
3. Describe the events taking place during interphase.

4. What is Go (quiescent phase) of cell cycle?