BIOLOGY

(b)

Figure 7.4 Figure showing white - winged moth and dark - winged moth (melanised)

132

on a tree trunk (a) In unpolluted area (b) In polluted area

The explanation put forth for this observation was that ‘predators will
spot a moth against a contrasting background’. During post-
industrialisation period, the tree trunks became dark due to industrial
smoke and soots. Under this condition the white-winged moth did not

survive due to predators, dark-winged or melanised moth survived. Before
industrialisation set in, thick growth of almost white-coloured lichen
covered the trees - in that background the white winged moth survived
but the dark-coloured moth were picked out by predators. Do you know
that lichens can be used as industrial pollution indicators? They will
not grow in areas that are polluted. Hence, moths that were able to
camouﬂage themselves, i.e., hide in the background, survived
(Figure 7 .4). This understanding is supported by the fact that in areas
where industrialisation did not occur e.g., in rural areas, the count of
melanic moths was low. This showed that in a mixed population, those
that can better-adapt, survive and increase in population size. Remember
that no variant is completely wiped out.

Similarly, excess use of herbicides, pesticides, etc., has only resulted in
selection of resistant varieties in a much lesser time scale. This is also true for
microbes against which we employ antibiotics or drugs against eukaryotic
organisms / cell. Hence, resistant organisms / cells are appearing in a time
scale of months or years and not centuries. These are examples of evolution
by anthropogenic action. This also tells us that evolution is not a directed
process in the sense of determinism. It is a stochastic process based on
chance events in nature and chance mutation in the organisms.

7.4 WHAT Is ADAPTIVE RADIATION?

During his journey Darwin went to Galapagos Islands. There he observed
an amazing diversity of creatures. Of particular interest, small black birds
later called Darwin’s Finches amazed him. He realised that there were many

2019-2020