BIOLOGY

the twentieth century, forests covered about 30 per cent of the land of
India. By the end of the century, it shrunk to 2 1.54 per cent, whereas the
National Forest Policy (1988) of India has recommended 33 per cent forest
cover for the plains and 67 per cent for the hills.

How does deforestation occur? A number of human activities
contribute to it. One of the major reasons is the conversion of forest to
agricultural land so as to feed the growing human population. Trees are
axed for timber, ﬁrewood, cattle ranching and for several other purposes.
Slash and burn agriculture, commonly called as Jhum cultivation in
the north-eastern states of India, has also contributed to deforestation.
In slash and burn agriculture, the farmers cut down the trees of the forest
and burn the plant remains. The ash is used as a fertiliser and the land is
then used for farming or cattle grazing. After cultivation, the area is left
for several years so as to allow its recovery. The farmers then move on to
other areas and repeat this process. In earlier days, when J hum cultivation
was in prevalence, enough time-gap was given so that the land recovered
from the effect of cultivation. With increasing population, and repeated
cultivation, this recovery phase is done away with, resulting in
deforestation.

What are the consequences of deforestation? One of the major effects
is enhanced carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere because
trees that could hold a lot of carbon in their biomass are lost with
deforestation. Deforestation also causes loss of biodiversity due to habitat
destruction, disturbs hydrologic cycle, causes soil erosion, and may lead
to desertiﬁcation in extreme cases.

Reforestation is the process of restoring a forest that once existed
but was removed at some point of time in the past. Reforestation may
occur naturally in a deforested area. However, we can speed it up by
planting trees with due consideration to biodiversity that earlier existed
in that area.

16.9. 1 Case Study of People’s Participation in
Conservation of Forests

People’s participation has a long history in India. In 1731, the king of
Jodhpur in Rajasthan asked one of his ministers to arrange wood for
constructing a new palace. The minister and workers went to a forest
near a village, inhabited by Bishnois, to cut down trees. The Bishnoi
community is known for its peaceful co-existence with nature. The effort
to cut down trees by the kings was thwarted by the Bishnois. A Bishnoi
woman Amrita Devi showed exemplary courage by hugging a tree and
daring king’s men to cut her ﬁrst before cutting the tree. The tree mattered
much more to her than her own life. Sadly, the king’s men did not heed to
her pleas, and cut down the tree along with Amrita Devi. Her three
daughters and hundreds of other Bishnois followed her, and thus lost
their lives saving trees. Nowhere in history do we ﬁnd a commitment of

2019—2020