78

 

BIOLOGY

Do you realise that the example of ABO blood grouping also provides
a good example of multiple alleles? Here you can see that there are
more than two, i.e., three alleles, governing the same character. Since in
an individual only two alleles can be present, multiple alleles can be found
only when population studies are made.

Occasionally, a single gene product may produce more than one effect.
For example, starch synthesis in pea seeds is controlled by one gene. It
has two alleles (B and b). Starch is synthesised effectively by BB
homozygotes and therefore, large starch grains are produced. In contrast,
bb homozygotes have lesser efficiency in starch synthesis and produce
smaller starch grains. After maturation of the seeds, BB seeds are round
and the bb seeds are wrinkled. Heterozygotes produce round seeds, and
so B seems to be the dominant allele. But, the starch grains produced are
of intermediate size in Bb seeds. So if starch grain size is considered as
the phenotype, then from this angle, the alleles show incomplete
dominance.

Therefore, dominance is not an autonomous feature of a gene or the
product that it has information for. It depends as much on the gene
product and the production of a particular phenotype from this product
as it does on the particular phenotype that we choose to examine, in case
more than one phenotype is inﬂuenced by the same gene.

5.3 INHERITANCE OF Two GENES

Mendel also worked with and crossed pea plants that differed in two
characters, as is seen in the cross between a pea plant that has seeds with
yellow colour and round shape and one that had seeds of green colour
and wrinkled shape (Figure5.7). Mendel found that the seeds resulting
from the crossing of the parents, had yellow coloured and round shaped
seeds. Here can you tell which of the characters in the pairs yellow/
green colour and round/ wrinkled shape was dominant?

Thus, yellow colour was dominant over green and round shape
dominant over wrinkled. These results were identical to those that he got
when he made separate monohybrid crosses between yellow and green
seeded plants and between round and wrinkled seeded plants.

Let us use the genotypic symbols Y for dominant yellow seed colour
and y for recessive green seed colour, R for round shaped seeds and r for
wrinkled seed shape. The genotype of the parents can then be written as
RRYY and rryy. The cross between the two plants can be written down
as in Figure 5.7 showing the genotypes of the parent plants. The gametes
RY and ry unite on fertilisation to produce the F1 hybrid RrYy. When
Mendel self hybridised the F1 plants he found that 3/4th of F2 plants had
yellow seeds and 1 /4th had green. The yellow and green colour segregated
in a 3:1 ratio. Round and wrinkled seed shape also segregated in a 3: 1
ratio; just like in a monohybrid cross.

2019-2020