STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

into a central nervous system (brain and spinal
cord), a peripheral nervous system (cranial and
spinal nerves) and an autonomic nervous system
(sympathetic and parasympathetic). There are ten
pairs of cranial nerves arising from the brain. Brain
is enclosed in a bony structure called brain box
(cranium). The brain is divided into fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain. Forebrain includes
olfactory lobes, paired cerebral hemispheres and
unpaired diencephalon. The midbrain is
characterised by a pair of optic lobes. Hind-brain
consists of cerebellum and medulla oblongata.
The medulla oblongata passes out through the
foramen magnum and continues into spinal cord,
which is enclosed in the vertebral column.

Frog has different types of sense organs, namely
organs of touch (sensory papillae), taste (taste
buds), smell (nasal epithelium), vision (eyes) and

hearing (tympanum with internal ears). Out of

these, eyes and internal ears are well-organised
structures and the rest are cellular aggregations

around nerve endings. Eyes in a frog are a pair of

spherical structures situated in the orbit in skull.
These are simple eyes (possessing only one unit).
External ear is absent in frogs and only tympanum

can be seen externally. The ear is an organ of

hearing as well as balancing (equilibrium).

Frogs have well organised male and female
reproductive systems. Male reproductive organs
consist of a pair of yellowish ovoid testes (Figure
7.2 1), which are found adhered to the upper part
of kidneys by a double fold of peritoneum called
mesorchium. Vasa efferentia are 1 0- 1 2 in
number that arise from testes. They enter the
kidneys on their side and open into Bidder’s
canal. Finally it communicates with the
urinogenital duct that comes out of the kidneys
and opens into the cloaca. The cloaca is a small,
median chamber that is used to pass faecal
matter, urine and sperms to the exterior.

The female reproductive organs include a pair
of ovaries (Figure 7.22). The ovaries are situated
near kidneys and there is no functional
connection with kidneys. A pair of oviduct arising

  
      
     

119
Vasa
efferentia
Fat
( bodies
T t‘
es Is Kidney

Adrenal r“ I
gland ._Urin0
.} genital duct
Rectum
Cloaca
Urinary Cloacal
bladder aperture

Figure 7.21 Male reproductive system

Oviduct

Ureter

Cloaca

Cloacal aperture

Urinary
bladder

Figure 7.22 Female reproductive system

2019-2020