STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION

Wheat and Rice: During the period 1960 to 2000, wheat production
increased from 1 1 million tonnes to 75 million tonnes while rice production
went up from 35 million tonnes to 89.5 million tonnes. This was due to the
development of semi-dwarf varieties of wheat and rice. Nobel laureate
Norman E. Borlaug, at International Centre for Wheat and Maize
Improvement in Mexico, developed semi-dwarf wheat. In 1963, several
varieties such as Sonalika and Kalyan Sona, which were high yielding and
disease resistant, were introduced all over the wheat-growing belt of India.
Semi-dwarf rice varieties were derived from IR—8, (developed at International
Rice Research Institute ﬂRRI), Philippines) and Taichung Native-1 (from
Taiwan). The derivatives were introduced in 1966. Later better-yielding semi-
dwarf varieties Jaya and Ratna were developed in India.

Sugar cane: Saccharum barberi was originally grown in north India, but
had poor sugar content and yield. Tropical canes grown in south India
Saccharum ofﬁcinarum had thicker stems and higher sugar content but
did not grow well in north India. These two species were successfully
crossed to get sugar cane varieties combining the desirable qualities of
high yield, thick stems, high sugar and ability to grow in the sugar cane
areas of north India.

Millets: Hybrid maize, j owar and bajra have been successfully developed
in India. Hybrid breeding have led to the development of several high
yielding van'eties resistant to water stress.

9.2.2 Plant Breeding for Disease Resistance

A wide range of fungal, bacterial and Viral pathogens, affect the yield of
cultivated crop species, especially in tropical climates. Crop losses can
often be signiﬁcant, up to 20-30 per cent, or sometimes even total. In this
situation, breeding and development of cultivars resistant to disease
enhances food production. This also helps reduce the dependence on
use of fungicides and bacteriocides. Resistance of the host plant is the
ability to prevent the pathogen from causing disease and is determined
by the genetic constitution of the host plant. Before breeding is
undertaken, it is important to know about the causative organism and
the mode of transmission. Some of the diseases caused by fungi are rusts,
e. g., brown rust of wheat, red rot of sugarcane and late blight of potato;
by bacteria—black rot of crucifers; and by Viruses—tobacco mosaic,
turnip mosaic, etc.

Methods of breeding for disease resistance: Breeding is carried
out by the conventional breeding techniques (described earlier) or by
mutation breeding. The conventional method of breeding for disease
resistance is that of hybridisation and selection. It’s steps are essentially
identical to those for breeding for any other agronomic characters such
as high yield. The various sequential steps are : screening germplasm

2019-2020

I73