PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION (\

the Tt plant is heterozygous for genes controlling
one character (height), it is a monohybrid and the
cross between TT and tt is a monohybrid cross.

From the observation that the recessive parental
trait is expressed without any blending in the F2 1
generation, we can infer that, when the tall and ’ Dwarf
dwarf plant produce gametes, by the process of
meiosis, the alleles of the parental pair separate or
segregate from each other and only one allele is
transmitted to a gamete. This segregation of alleles
is a random process and so there is a 50 per cent
chance of a gamete containing either allele, as has
been veriﬁed by the results of the crossings. In this
way the gametes of the tall TT plants have the allele
T and the gametes of the dwarf tt plants have the
allele t. During fertilisation the two alleles, T from
one parent say, through the pollen, and t from the
other parent, then through the egg, are united to

Gametes

    

produce zygotes that have one T allele and one t L‘” szlf‘mg L“:

allele. In other words the hybrids have Tt. Since T1111 T1111
these hybrids contain alleles which express

contrasting traits, the plants are heterozygous. The Gametes . . Gametes
production of gametes by the parents, the formation

  

of the zygotes, the F1 and F2 plants can be . .
understood from a diagram called Punnett Square ”IT

as shown in Figure 5.4. It was developed by a British F2 generation

geneticist, Reginald C. Punnett. It is a graphical ”[1: %

representation to calculate the probability of all
possible genotypes of offspring in a genetic cross.
The possible gametes are written on two sides, Phenotypic ratio . tall . dwarf
usually the top row and left columns. All possible ' 3 1
combinations are represented in boxes below in the Genotypic ratio : ’IT : Tt : tt
squares, which generates a square output form. 1 : 2 2 1

The Punnett Square shows the parental tallTT Figure 5-4 A Punnett square used to
(male) and dwarf tt (female) plants, the gametes underStand a typical monOhybﬁd

cross conducted by Mendel
produced by them and, the F1 Tt progeny. The F1 between true-breeding tall plants

plants of genotype Tt are self-pollinated. The and true-breeding dwarf plants
symbols 9 and o" are used to denote the female
(eggs) and male (pollen) of the F1 generation, respectively. The F1 plant of
the genotype Tt when self-pollinated, produces gametes of the genotype
—

T and t in equal proportion. When fertilisation takes place, the pollen
grains of genotype T have a 50 per cent chance to pollinate eggs of the
genotype T, as well as of genotype t. Also pollen grains of genotype t have
a 50 per cent chance of pollinating eggs of genotype T, as well as of

2019-2020