TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

examples of imbibition are absorption of water by seeds and dry wood.
The pressure that is produced by the swelling of wood had been used by
prehistoric man to split rocks and boulders. If it were not for the pressure
due to imbibition, seedlings would not have been able to emerge out of
the soil into the open; they probably would not have been able to establish!

Imbibition is also diffusion since water movement is along a
concentration gradient; the seeds and other such materials have almost no
water hence they absorb water easily. Water potential gradient between
the absorbent and the liquid imbibed is essential for imbibition. In addition,
for any substance to imbibe any liquid, afﬁnity between the adsorbant and
the liquid is also a pre-requisite.

1 1.3 LONG DISTANCE TRANSPORT OF WATER

At some earlier stage you might have carried out an experiment where
you had placed a twig bearing white ﬂowers in coloured water and had
watched it turn colour. On examining the cut end of the twig after a few
hours you had noted the region through which the coloured water moved.
’Ihat experiment very easily demonstrates that the path of water movement
is through the vascular bundles, more speciﬁcally, the xylem. Now we
have to go further and try and understand the mechanism of movement
of water and other substances up a plant.

Long distance transport of substances within a plant cannot be by
diffusion alone. Diffusion is a slow process. It can account for only short
distance movement of molecules. For example, the movement of a molecule
across a typical plant cell (about 50 um) takes approximately 2.5 s. At this
rate, can you calculate how many years it would take for the movement
of molecules over a distance of 1 m within a plant by diffusion alone?

In large and complex organisms, often substances have to be moved
to long distances. Sometimes the sites of production or absorption and
sites of storage are too far from each other; diffusion or active transport
would not sufﬁce. Special long distance transport systems become
necessary so as to move substances across long distances and at a much
faster rate. Water and minerals, and food are generally moved by a mass
or bulk ﬂow system. Mass ﬂow is the movement of substances in bulk or
en masse from one point to another as a result of pressure differences
between the two points. It is a characteristic of mass ﬂow that substances,
whether in solution or in suspension, are swept along at the same pace,
as in a ﬂowing river. This is unlike diffusion where different substances
move independently depending on their concentration gradients. Bulk
ﬂow can be achieved either through a positive hydrostatic pressure
gradient (e. g., a garden hose) or a negative hydrostatic pressure gradient
(e. g., suction through a straw).

183