138

 

Figure 8.11 Structure of nucleus

 

BIOLOGY

made up of nine evenly spaced peripheral ﬁbrils of tubulin protein. Each
of the peripheral ﬁbril is a triplet.The adjacent triplets are also linked.
The central part of the proximal region of the centriole is also proteinaceous
and called the hub, which is connected with tubules of the peripheral
triplets by radial spokes made of protein. The centrioles form the basal
body of cilia or ﬂagella, and spindle fibres that give rise to spindle
apparatus during cell division in animal cells.

8.5. 10 Nucleus

Nucleus as a cell organelle was ﬁrst described by Robert Brown as early
as 1 83 1. Later the material of the nucleus stained by the basic dyes was
given the name chromatin by Fleming.

The interphase nucleus (nucleus of a
cell when it is not dividing) has highly
extended and elaborate nucleoprotein
ﬁbres called chromatin, nuclear matrix
and one or more spherical bodies called
nucleoli (sing: nucleolus) (Figure 8.1 1).
Electron microscopy has revealed that the
nuclear envelope, which consists of two
parallel membranes with a space between
(10 to 50 nm) called the perinuclear
Nuaear space, forms a barrier between the
membrane

materials present inside the nucleus and

that of the cytoplasm. The outer

membrane usually remains continuous

with the endoplasmic reticulum and also

bears ribosomes on it. At a number of
places the nuclear envelope is interrupted by minute pores, which are
formed by the fusion of its two membranes. These nuclear pores are the
passages through which movement of RNA and protein molecules takes
place in both directions between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Normally,
there is only one nucleus per cell, variations in the number of nuclei are
also frequently observed. Can you recollect names of organisms that
have more than one nucleus per cell? Some mature cells even lack
nucleus, e.g., erythrocytes of many mammals and sieve tube cells of
vascular plants. Would you consider these cells as ‘living’?

The nuclear matrix or the nucleoplasm contains nucleolus and
chromatin. The nucleoli are spherical structures present in the
nucleoplasm. The content of nucleolus is continuous with the rest of the
nucleoplasm as it is not a membrane bound structure. It is a site for
active ribosomal RNA synthesis. Larger and more numerous nucleoli are
present in cells actively carrying out protein synthesis.

Nucleoplasm

Nucleolus
Nuclear pore