HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE

monocytes and natural killer (type of lymphocytes) in the blood as
well as macrophages in tissues can phagocytose and destroy
microbes.

(iv) Cytokine barriers : Virus-infected cells secrete proteins called
interferons which protect non-infected cells from further viral
infection.

8.2.2 Acquired Immunity

Acquired immunity, on the other hand is pathogen specific. It is
characterised by memory. This means when our body encounters a
pathogen for the ﬁrst time it produces a response called primary
response which is of low intensity. Subsequent encounter with the same
pathogen elicits a highly intensiﬁed secondary or anamnestic response.
This is ascribed to the fact that our body appears to have memory of the
ﬁrst encounter.

 

The primary and secondary /
immune responses are Antigen binding site
carried out with the help
of two special types of
lymphocytes present in our
blood, i.e., B-lymphocytes and
T-lymphocytes.

’Ihe B—lymphocytes produce an
army of proteins in response to
pathogens into our blood to ﬁght
with them. These proteins are
called antibodies. The
T-cells themselves do not secrete
antibodies but help B cells to
produce them. Each antibody
molecule has four peptide chains,
two small called light chains and

Heavy chain

 

   
    

Antigen binding site

two longer called heavy chains. Figure 8.4 Structure of an antibody molecule

Hence, an antibody is represented

as H2L2. Different types of antibodies are produced in our body. IgA, IgM,
IgE, IgG are some of them. A cartoon of an antibody is given in Figure
8.4. Because these antibodies are found in the blood, the response is also
called as humoral immune response. This is one of the two types of
our acquired immune response — antibody mediated. The second type is
called cell-mediated immune response or cell-mediated immunity
(CMI). The T-lymphocytes mediate CMI. Very often, when some human
organs like heart, eye, liver, kidney fail to function satisfactorily,
transplantation is the only remedy to enable the patient to live a normal
life. Then a search begins — to ﬁnd a suitable donor. Why is it that the
organs cannot be taken from just anybody? What is it that the doctors

2019—2020