140

 

BIOLOGY

Sometimes a few chromosomes have non-staining secondary
constrictions at a constant location. This gives the appearance of a small

fragment called the satellite.

8.5. 1 1 Microbodies

Many membrane bound minute vesicles called microbodies that contain

various enzymes, are present in both plant and animal cells.

SUMMARY

All organisms are made of cells or aggregates of cells. Cells vary in their shape, size
and activities / functions. Based on the presence or absence of a membrane bound
nucleus and other organelles, cells and hence organisms can be named as
eukaryotic or prokaryotic.

A typical eukaryotic cell consists of a cell membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm.
Plant cells have a cell wall outside the cell membrane. The plasma membrane is
selectively permeable and facilitates transport of several molecules. The
endomembrane system IncludesEEréolgl complex, lysosomes and vacuoles. All
the cell organelles perform different but speciﬁc funé’ on?» Centrosome and centriole
form the basal body of cilia 16flagella that faé‘ili teﬂlocomotion. In animal cells,
centrioles also form spllxgllggy paratus d,u1’1g cell division. Nucleus contains
nucleoli and chromatin new/ml? It notﬁog 111% genlirols the activities of organelles
but also plays a myagﬂor role in 3§’heredity?€:l

Endoplasmic g’re‘ticu’llum contains tux‘ules or cisternae. They are of two types.
rough and smoo’tﬁiy‘ER helps ﬁﬁhe transport of substances, synthesis of
proteins, lipoproteins an g1 gené’il‘he golgi body 1s a membranous organelle
composed of ﬂattened sa ﬁe secretions of cells are packed in them and
transported from the cell. fysosomes are single membrane structures
containing enzymes 1" r digestion of all types of macromolecules. Ribosomes
are involved in p‘ﬁotelnvsynthesm These occur freely in the cytoplasm or are
associated with ER»; 1Mitochondria help in oxidative phosphorylation and
generation of adenosine triphosphate. They are bound by double membrane;
the outer membrane is smooth and inner one folds into several cristae. Plastids
are pigment containing organelles found in plant cells only. In plant cells,
chloroplasts are responsible for trapping light energy essential for
photosynthesis. The grana, in the plastid, is the site of light reactions and the
stroma of dark reactions. The green coloured plastids are chloroplasts, which
contain chlorophyll, whereas the other coloured plastids are chromoplasts,
which may contain pigments like carotene and xanthophyll. The nucleus is
enclosed by nuclear envelope, a double membrane structure with nuclear pores.
The inner membrane encloses the nucleoplasm and the chromatin material.
Thus, cell is the structural and functional unit of life.