164

You have studied
mitosis in onion root
tip cells. It has 16
chromosomes in
each cell. Can you
tell how many
chromosomes will
the cell have at G1
phase, after S phase,
and after M phase?
Also, what will be the
DNA content of the
cells at G1, after S
and at G2, if the
content after M
phase is 2C?

BiowGY

Some cells in the adult animals do not appear to exhibit division (e.g.,
heart cells) and many other cells divide only occasionally, as needed to
replace cells that have been lost because of injury or cell death. These
cells that do not divide further exit G1 phase to enter an inactive stage
called quiescent stage (Go) of the cell cycle. Cells in this stage remain
metabolically active but no longer proliferate unless called on to do so
depending on the requirement of the organism.

In animals, mitotic cell division is only seen in the diploid somatic
cells. However, there are few exceptions to this where haploid cells divide
by mitosis, for example, male honey bees. Against this, the plants can
show mitotic divisions in both haploid and diploid cells. From your
recollection of examples of alternation of generations in plants (Chapter 3)
identify plant species and stages at which mitosis is seen in haploid cells.

10.2 M PHASE

This is the most dramatic period of the cell cycle, involving a major
reorganisation of virtually all components of the cell. Since the number of
chromosomes in the parent and progeny cells is the same, it is also called as
equational division. Though for convenience mitosis has been divided
into four stages of nuclear division (karyokinesis), it is very essential to
understand that cell division is a progressive process and very clear-cut
lines cannot be drawn between various stages. Karyokinesis involves
following four stages:

0 Prophase
o Metaphase
o Anaphase
o Telophase

1 0.2.1 Prophase

Prophase which is the first stage of karyokinesis of mitosis follows the
S and G2 phases of interphase. In the S and G2 phases the new DNA
molecules formed are not distinct but intertwined. Prophase is marked
by the initiation of condensation of chromosomal material. The
chromosomal material becomes untangled during the process of
chromatin condensation (Figure 10.2 a). The centrosome, which had
undergone duplication during S phase of interphase, now begins to move
towards opposite poles of the cell. The completion of prophase can thus
be marked by the following characteristic events:

0 Chromosomal material condenses to form compact mitotic
chromosomes. Chromosomes are seen to be composed of two
chromatids attached together at the centromere.

O Centrosome which had undergone duplication during interphase,
begins to move towards opposite poles of the cell. Each centrosome
radiates out microtubules called asters. The two asters together

with spindle fibres forms mitotic apparatus.

2019-2020