EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

A survey of animal kingdom presents a variety of excretory structures.
In most of the invertebrates, these structures are simple tubular forms
whereas vertebrates have complex tubular organs called kidneys. Some
of these structures are mentioned here. Protonephridia or ﬂame cells are
the excretory structures in Platyhelminthes (Flatworms, e. g., Planaria),
rotifers, some annelids and the cephalochordate — Amphioxus.
Protonephridia are primarily concerned with ionic and ﬂuid volume
regulation, i.e., osmoregulation. Nephridia are the tubular excretory
structures of earthworms and other annelids. Nephridia help to remove
nitrogenous wastes and maintain a ﬂuid and ionic balance. Malpighian
tubules are the excretory structures of most of the insects including
cockroaches. Malpighian tubules help in the removal of nitrogenous
wastes and osmoregulation. Antennal glands or green glands perform
the excretory function in crustaceans like prawns.

19. 1 HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM

In humans, the excretory system consists
of a pair of kidneys, one pair of ureters, a
urinary bladder and a urethra (Figure
19.1). Kidneys are reddish brown, bean

Adrenal gland
shaped structures situated between the

    
 
  
  

levels of last thoracic and third lumbar velrrllalegga Renal artery
vertebra close to the dorsal inner wall of ,

, Renal vem
the abdominal cavity. Each kidney of an PelWS

adult human measures 10- 12 cm in
length, 5-7 cm in width, 2-3 cm in
thickness with an average weight of 120-
170 g. Towards the centre of the inner
concave surface of the kidney is a notch
called hilum through which ureter, blood
vessels and nerves enter. Inner to the hilum
is a broad funnel shaped space called the

Dorsal aorta

Ureter

renal pelvis with projections called calyces. 5:31?
The outer layer of kidney is a tough a er
Urethra

capsule. Inside the kidney, there are two
zones, an outer cortex and an inner
medulla. The medulla is divided into a few
conical masses (medullary pyramids)
projecting into the calyces (sing: calyx).
The cortex extends in between the

Figure 19.1 Human Urinary system