REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS

In many terrestrial organisms, belonging to fungi, higher animals such
as reptiles, birds, mammals and in a majority of plants (bryophytes,
pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms), syngamy occurs inside
the body of the organism, hence the process is called internal fertilisation.
In all these organisms, egg is formed inside the female body where they
fuse with the male gamete. In organisms exhibiting internal fertilisation,
the male gamete is motile and has to reach the egg in order to fuse with it.
In these even though the number of sperms produced is very large, there
is a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of eggs produced. In seed plants,
however, the non-motile male gametes are carried to female gamete by
pollen tubes.

1.2.3 Post-fertilisation Events

Events in sexual reproduction after the formation of zygote are called
post-fertilisation events.

1.2.3. 1 The Zygote

Formation of the diploid zygote is universal in all sexually reproducing
organisms. In organisms with external fertilisation, zygote is formed in
the external medium (usually water), whereas in those exhibiting internal
fertilisation, zygote is formed inside the body of the organism.

Further development of the zygote depends on the type of life cycle
the organism has and the environment it is exposed to. In organisms
belonging to fungi and algae, zygote develops a thick wall that is resistant
to dessication and damage. It undergoes a period of rest before
germination. In organisms with haplontic life cycle (As you have read
in Class XI), zygote divides by meiosis to form haploid spores that grow
into haploid individuals. Consult your Class XI book and ﬁnd out what
kind of development takes place in the zygote in organisms with diplontic
and haplo—diplontic life cycles.

Zygote is the vital link that ensures continuity of species
between organisms of one generation and the next. Every sexually
reproducing organism, including human beings begin life as a single
cell—the zygote.

1 2.3.2 Embryogenesis

Embryogenesis refers to the process of development of embryo from the
zygote. During embryogenesis, zygote undergoes cell division (mitosis)
and cell differentiation. While cell divisions increase the number of cells
in the developing embryo; cell differentiation helps groups of cells to
undergo certain modiﬁcations to form specialised tissues and organs to
form an organism. You have studied about the process of cell division
and differentiation in the previous class.

2019—2020