MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE

You can appreciate how microbes play a major
role in treating millions of gallons of waste water
everyday across the globe. This methodology has
been practiced for more than a century now, in
almost all parts of the world. Till date, no man-
made technology has been able to rival the
microbial treatment of sewage.

You are aware that due to increasing
urbanisation, sewage is being produced in much
larger quantities than ever before. However the
number of sewage treatment plants has not
increased enough to treat such large quantities.
So the untreated sewage is often discharged directly into rivers leading to
their pollution and increase in water-borne diseases.

The Ministry of Environment and Forests has initiated Ganga Action
Plan and Yamuna Action Plan to save these major rivers of our country
from pollution. Under these plans, it is proposed to build a large number
of sewage treatment plants so that only treated sewage may be discharged
in the rivers. A visit to a sewage treatment plant situated in any place
near you would be a very interesting and educating experience.

10.4 MICROBES IN PRODUCTION or BIOGAS

Biogas is a mixture of gases (containing predominantly methane) produced
by the microbial activity and which may be used as fuel. You have learnt
that microbes produce different types of gaseous end-products during
growth and metabolism. The type of the gas produced depends upon the
microbes and the organic substrates they utilise. In the examples cited in
relation to fermentation of dough, cheese making and production of
beverages, the main gas produced was C02. However, certain bacteria,
which grow anaerobically on cellulosic material, produce large amount
of methane along with CO2 and H2. These bacteria are collectively called
methanogens, and one such common bacterium is Methanobacterium.
These bacteria are commonly found in the anaerobic sludge during
sewage treatment. These bacteria are also present in the rumen (a part of
stomach) of cattle. A lot of cellulosic material present in the food of cattle
is also present in the rumen. In rumen, these bacteria help in the
breakdown of cellulose and play an important role in the nutrition of
cattle. Do you think we, human beings, are able to digest the celluose
present in our foods?Thus, the excreta (dung) of cattle, commonly called
gobar, is rich in these bacteria. Dung can be used for generation of biogas,
commonly called gobar gas.

The biogas plant consists of a concrete tank (10- 15 feet deep) in which
bio-wastes are collected and a slurry of dung is fed. A ﬂoating cover is

2019-2020

Figure 10.7 An aerial view of a sewage plant