BIOLOGY

Pollen grains are rich in nutrients. It has become a fashion in recent
years to use pollen tablets as food supplements. In western countries, a
large number of pollen products in the form of tablets and syrups are
available in the market. Pollen consumption has been claimed to increase
the performance of athletes and race horses (Figure 2.6).

TABLETS

Bee Pollen

from England

Natural Bee— collected Pollen
in Tiny Golden Pods

A natural food from honey bees
NET WEIGHT .45 OZ.

Figure 2.6 Pollen products

When once they are shed, pollen grains have to land on the stigma
before they lose Viability if they have to bring about fertilisation. How long
do you think the pollen grains retain Viability? The period for which pollen
grains remain viable is highly variable and to some extent depends on the
prevailing temperature and humidity. In some cereals such as rice and
wheat, pollen grains lose viability within 30 minutes of their release, and
in some members of Rosaceae, Leguminoseae and Solanaceae, they
maintain viability for months. You may have heard of storing semen/
sperms of many animals including humans for artiﬁcial insemination. It
is possible to store pollen grains of a large number of species for years in
liquid nitrogen (— 196°C). Such stored pollen can be used as pollen banks,
similar to seed banks, in crop breeding programmes.

2.2.2 The Pistil, Megasporangium (ovule) and Embryo sac

The gynoecium represents the female reproductive part of the ﬂower. The
gynoecium may consist of a single pistil (monocarpellary) or may have
more than one pistil (multicarpellary). When there are more than one,
the pistils may be fused together (syncarpous) (Figure 2.7b) or may be
free (apocarpous) (Figure 2.7 c). Each pistil has three parts (Figure 2.7a),
the stigma, style and ovary. The stigma serves as a landing platform
for pollen grains. The style is the elongated slender part beneath the
stigma. The basal bulged part of the pistil is the ovary. Inside the ovary
is the ovarian cavity (locule). The placenta is located inside the ovarian
cavity. Recall the deﬁnition and types of placentation that you studied in

2019-2020