BIOLOGY

frameshift insertion or deletion mutations. Insertion or deletion of
three or its multiple bases insert or delete in one or multiple codon hence
one or multiple amino acids, and reading frame remains unaltered from
that point onwards.

6.6.2 tRNA— the Adapter Molecule

From the very beginning of the proposition of code, it was clear to Francis
Crick that there has to be a mechanism to read the code and also to link it
to the amino acids, because amino acids have no structural specialities to
read the code uniquely. He postulated the presence of an adapter molecule
that would on one hand read the code and on other hand would bind
to speciﬁc amino acids. The tRNA, then called sRNA (soluble RNA),
was known before the genetic code was postulated. However, its role
as an adapter molecule was assigned much later.

tRNA has an
anticodon loop
that has bases
complementary to
the code, and it also
has an amino acid
acceptor end to
which it binds to
amino acids.
tRNAs are speciﬁc
for each amino acid
(Figure 6.12). For

Figure 6.12 tRNA - the adapter molecule initiation there is

another speciﬁc tRNA that is referred to as initiator tRNA. There are no
tRNAs for stop codons. In ﬁgure 6.12, the secondary structure of tRNA
has been depicted that looks like a clover-leaf. In actual structure, the
tRNA is a compact molecule which looks like inverted L.

6.7 TRANSLATION

Translation refers to the process of polymerisation of amino acids to
form a polypeptide (Figure 6.13). The order and sequence of amino acids
are deﬁned by the sequence of bases in the mRNA. The amino acids are
joined by a bond which is known as a peptide bond. Formation of a
peptide bond requires energy. Therefore, in the ﬁrst phase itself amino
acids are activated in the presence of ATP and linked to their cognate
tRNA—a process commonly called as charging of tRNA or
aminoacylation of tRNA to be more speciﬁc. If two such charged tRNAs
are brought close enough, the formation of peptide bond between them

2019—2020