MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE

After Penicillin, other antibiotics were also purified from other
microbes. Can you name some other antibiotics and ﬁnd out their
sources? Antibiotics have greatly improved our capacity to treat deadly
diseases such as plague, whooping cough (kali khansi), diphtheria (gal
ghotu) and leprosy (kusht rog), which used to kill millions all over the
globe. Today, we cannot imagine a world Without antibiotics.

10.2.3 Chemicals, Enzymes and other Bioactive Molecules

Microbes are also used for commercial and industrial production of
certain chemicals like organic acids, alcohols and enzymes. Examples of
acid producers are Aspergillus niger (a fungus) of citric acid, Acetobacter
aceti (a bacterium) of acetic acid; Clostridium butylicum (a bacterium) of
butyric acid and Lactobacillus (a bacterium) of lactic acid.

Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is used for commercial production
of ethanol. Microbes are also used for production of enzymes. Lipases are
used in detergent formulations and are helpful in removing oily stains
from the laundry. You must have noticed that bottled fruit juices bought
from the market are clearer as compared to those made at home. This is
because the bottled juices are clariﬁed by the use of pectinases and
proteases. Streptokinase produced by the bacterium Streptococcus and
modiﬁed by genetic engineering is used as a ‘clot buster’ for removing
clots from the blood vessels of patients who have undergone myocardial
infarction leading to heart attack.

Another bioactive molecule, cyclosporin A, that is used as an
immunosuppressive agent in organ-transplant patients, is produced by
the fungus Trichoderma polysporum. Statins produced by the yeast
Monascus purpureus have been commercialised as blood-cholesterol
lowering agents. It acts by competitively inhibiting the enzyme responsible
for synthesis of cholesterol.

10.3 MICROBES IN SEWAGE TREATMENT

We know that large quantities of waste water are generated everyday in
cities and towns. A major component of this waste water is human excreta.
This municipal waste-water is also called sewage. It contains large
amounts of organic matter and microbes. Many of which are pathogenic.
Have you ever wondered where this huge quantity of sewage or urban
waste water is disposed off daily? This cannot be discharged into natural
water bodies like rivers and streams directly — you can understand why.
Before disposal, hence, sewage is treated in sewage treatment plants (STPs)
to make it less polluting. Treatment of waste water is done by the

2019-2020

183