ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

(iii)

the occurrence of competition in nature comes from what is called
‘competitive release’. A species whose distribution is restricted to a
small geographical area because of the presence of a competitively
superior species, is found to expand its distributional range
dramatically when the competing species is experimentally removed.
Connell’s elegant field experiments showed that on the rocky sea
coasts of Scotland, the larger and competitively superior barnacle
Balanus dominates the intertidal area, and excludes the smaller
barnacle Chathamalus from that zone. In general, herbivores and
plants appear to be more adversely affected by competition than
carnivores.

Gause’s ‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ states that two
closely related species competing for the same resources cannot
co-exist indeﬁnitely and the competitively inferior one will be
eliminated eventually. This may be true if resources are limiting,
but not otherwise. More recent studies do not support such gross
generalisations about competition. While they do not rule out the
occurrence of interspeciﬁc competition in nature, they point out
that species facing competition might evolve mechanisms that
promote co-existence rather than exclusion. One such mechanism
is ‘resource partitioning’. If two species compete for the same
resource, they could avoid competition by choosing, for instance,
different times for feeding or different foraging patterns. MacArthur
showed that five closely related species of warblers living on the
same tree were able to avoid competition and co-exist due to
behavioural differences in their foraging activities.

Parasitism: Considering that the parasitic mode of life ensures
free lodging and meals, it is not surprising that parasitism has
evolved in so many taxonomic groups from plants to higher
vertebrates. Many parasites have evolved to be host-specific (they
can parasitise only a single species of host) in such a way that both
host and the parasite tend to co-evolve; that is, if the host evolves
special mechanisms for rejecting or resisting the parasite, the
parasite has to evolve mechanisms to counteract and neutralise
them, in order to be successful with the same host species. In
accordance with their life styles, parasites evolved special
adaptations such as the loss of unnecessary sense organs, presence
of adhesive organs or suckers to cling on to the host, loss of digestive
system and high reproductive capacity. The life cycles of parasites
are often complex, involving one or two intermediate hosts or vectors
to facilitate parasitisation of its primary host. The human liver ﬂuke
(a trematode parasite) depends on two intermediate hosts (a snail
and a ﬁsh) to complete its life cycle. The malarial parasite needs a

2019—2020

 
 

235