BIOLOGY

Animals are categorised into oviparous and Viviparous based on
whether the development of the zygote takes place outside the body of
the female parent or inside, i.e., whether they lay fertilised / unfertilised
eggs or give birth to young ones. In oviparous animals like reptiles and
birds, the fertilised eggs covered by hard calcareous shell are laid in a
safe place in the environment; after a period of incubation young ones
hatch out. On the other hand, in Viviparous animals (maj ority of mammals
including human beings), the zygote develops into a young one inside
the body of the female organism. After attaining a certain stage of growth,
the young ones are delivered out of the body of the female organism.
Because of proper embryonic care and protection, the chances of survival
of young ones is greater in Viviparous organisms.

In ﬂowering plants, the zygote is formed inside the ovule. After
fertilisation the sepals, petals and stamens of the ﬂower wither and fall
off. Can you name a plant in which the sepals remain attached? The
pistil however, remains attached to the plant. The zygote develops into
the embryo and the ovules develop into the seed. The ovary develops into
the fruit which develops a thick wall called pericarp that is protective in
function (Figure 1.8). After dispersal, seeds germinate under favourable
conditions to produce new plants.

 

Figure 1.8 A few kinds of fruit showing seeds (S) and
protective pericarp (P)

 

 

 

 

 

SUMMARY

Reproduction enables a species to live generation after generation.
Reproduction in organisms can be broadly classiﬁed into asexual and
sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction does not involve the fusion
of gametes. It is common in organisms that have a relatively simple
organisation such as the fungi, algae and some invertebrate animals.
The offspring formed by asexual reproduction are identical and can be
referred to as clones. Zoospores, conidia, etc., are the most common
asexual structures formed in several algae and fungi. Budding
and gemmule formation are the common asexual methods seen in
lower animals.

Prokaryotes and unicellular organisms reproduce asexually by
cell division or binary fission of the parent cell. In several aquatic and

 

 

2019—2020