20

Cell wall

Cell
membrane

 

 

BIOLOGY

roots, etc. Some are pathogens causing damage
to human beings, crops, farm animals and pets.
Cholera, typhoid, tetanus, citrus canker are well
known diseases caused by different bacteria.

Bacteria reproduce mainly by ﬁssion (Figure
2.3). Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions,
they produce spores. They also reproduce by a
sort of sexual reproduction by adopting a
primitive type of DNA transfer from one bacterium
to the other.

Figure 2.3 A dividing bacterium The Mycoplasma are organisms that

completely lack a cell wall. They are the smallest
living cells known and can survive without oxygen. Many mycoplasma
are pathogenic in animals and plants.

2.2 KINGDOM PROTISTA

All single-celled eukaryotes are placed under Protista, but the boundaries
of this kingdom are not well deﬁned. What may be ‘a photosynthetic
protistan’ to one biologist may be ‘a plant’ to another. In this book we
include Chrysophytes, Dinoﬂagellates, Euglenoids, Slime moulds and
Protozoans under Protista. Members of Protista are primarily aquatic.
This kingdom forms a link with the others dealing with plants, animals
and fungi. Being eukaryotes, the protistan cell body contains a well deﬁned
nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles. Some have ﬂagella or
cilia. Protists reproduce asexually and sexually by a process involving
cell fusion and zygote formation.

2.2. 1 Chrysophytes

This group includes diatoms and golden algae (desmids). They are found
in fresh water as well as in marine environments. They are microscopic
and ﬂoat passively in water currents (plankton). Most of them are
photosynthetic. In diatoms the cell walls form two thin overlapping shells,
which ﬁt together as in a soap box. The walls are embedded with silica
and thus the walls are indestructible. Thus, diatoms have left behind
large amount of cell wall deposits in their habitat; this accumulation over
billions of years is referred to as ‘diatomaceous earth’. Being gritty this
soil is used in polishing, ﬁltration of oils and syrups. Diatoms are the
chief ‘producers’ in the oceans.