136

  

Figure 8.8 Sectional View of chloroplast

BIOLOGY

Outer membrane the aleuroplasts store proteins.

Inner membrane Majority of the chloroplasts of the green
plants are found in the mesophyll cells of
the leaves. These are lens-shaped, oval,
ThylakOid spherical, discoid or even ribbon-like
Stroma organelles having variable length (5- lOum)
lamella and width (2-4um). Their number varies

from 1 per cell of the Chlamydomonas, a

green alga to 20-40 per cell in the mesophyll.

Like mitochondria, the chloroplasts are

also double membrane bound. Of the two,

the inner chloroplast membrane is relatively

less permeable. The space limited by the

inner membrane of the chloroplast is called the stroma. A number of organised

ﬂattened membranous sacs called the thylakoids, are present in the stroma

(Figure 8.8). Thylakoids are arranged in stacks like the piles of coins called

grana (singular: granum) or the intergranal thylakoids. In addition, there are

ﬂat membranous tubules called the stroma lamellae connecting the thylakoids

of the different grana. The membrane of the thylakoids enclose a space called

a lumen. The stroma of the chloroplast contains enzymes required for the

synthesis of carbohydrates and proteins. It also contains small, double-

stranded circular DNA molecules and ribosomes. Chlorophyll pigments are

present in the thylakoids. The ribosomes of the chloroplasts are smaller (708)
than the cytoplasmic ribosomes (808).

8.5.6 Ribosomes

Ribosomes are the granular structures ﬁrst observed under the electron
microscope as dense particles by George Palade (1953). They are

Largﬁ composed of ribonucleic acid (RNA) and proteins and
subunit
are not surrounded by any membrane.
The eukaryotic ribosomes are 808 while the
Small 7 prokaryotic ribosomes are 708. Each ribosome has two
" ' subunits, larger and smaller subunits (Fig 8.9). The two

subunit

Figure 8.9 Ribosome

subunits of 808 ribosomes are 608 and 408 while that
of 708 ribosomes are 508 and 308. Here ‘8’ (Svedberg’s
Unit) stands for the sedimentation coefficient; it is
indirectly a measure of density and size. Both 7 OS and
808 ribosomes are composed of two subunits.

8.5.7 Cytoskeleton

An elaborate network of filamentous proteinaceous structures consisting
of microtubules, microﬁlaments and intermediate filaments present in
the cytoplasm is collectively referred to as the cytoskeleton. The
cytoskeleton in a cell are involved in many functions such as mechanical
support, motility, maintenance of the shape of the cell.

201 9-2020