BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION

2.4 KINGDOM PLANTAE

Kingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing
organisms commonly called plants. A few members are partially
heterotrophic such as the insectivorous plants or parasites. Bladderwort
and Venus ﬂy trap are examples of insectivorous plants and Cuscuta is a
parasite. The plant cells have an eukaryotic structure with prominent
chloroplasts and cell wall mainly made of cellulose. You will study the
eukaryotic cell structure in detail in Chapter 8. Plantae includes algae,
bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms.

Life cycle of plants has two distinct phases — the diploid sporophytic
and the haploid gametophytic — that alternate with each other. The lengths
of the haploid and diploid phases, and whether these phases are free—
living or dependent on others, vary among different groups in plants.
This phenomenon is called alternation of generation. You will study
further details of this kingdom in Chapter 3.

2.5 KINGDOM ANIMALIA

This kingdom is characterised by heterotrophic eukaryotic organisms
that are multicellular and their cells lack cell walls. They directly or
indirectly depend on plants for food. They digest their food in an internal
cavity and store food reserves as glycogen or fat. Their mode of nutrition
is holozoic — by ingestion of food. They follow a deﬁnite grth pattern
and grow into adults that have a deﬁnite shape and size. Higher forms
show elaborate sensory and neuromotor mechanism. Most of them are
capable of locomotion.

The sexual reproduction is by copulation of male and female followed
by embryological development. Salient features of various phyla are
described in Chapter 4.

2.6 VIRUSES, VIROIDS, PRIONs AND LICHENS

In the ﬁve kingdom classiﬁcation of Whittaker there is no mention of lichens
and some acellular organisms like viruses, viroids and prions. These are
brieﬂy introduced here.

All of us who have suffered the ill effects of common cold or ‘ﬂu’ know
what effects viruses can have on us, even if we do not associate it with our
condition. Viruses did not ﬁnd a place in classiﬁcation since they are not
considered truly ‘living’, if we understand lian as those organisms that
have a cell structure. The viruses are non-cellular organisms that are
characterised by having an inert crystalline structure outside the lian cell.

25