BIOLOGY

The genes in a cell are expressed to perform a particular function or a
set of functions. For example, if an enzyme called beta-galactosidase is
synthesised by E. coli, it is used to catalyse the hydrolysis of a
disaccharide, lactose into galactose and glucose; the bacteria use them
as a source of energy. Hence, if the bacteria do not have lactose around
them to be utilised for energy source, they would no longer require the
synthesis of the enzyme beta-galactosidase. Therefore, in simple terms,
it is the metabolic, physiological or environmental conditions that regulate
the expression of genes. The development and differentiation of embryo
into adult organisms are also a result of the coordinated regulation of
expression of several sets of genes.

In prokaryotes, control of the rate of transcriptional initiation is the
predominant site for control of gene expression. In a transcription unit,
the activity of RNA polymerase at a given promoter is in turn regulated
by interaction with accessory proteins, which affect its ability to recognise
start sites. These regulatory proteins can act both positively (activators)
and negatively (repressors). The accessibility of promoter regions of
prokaryotic DNA is in many cases regulated by the interaction of proteins
with sequences termed operators. The operator region is adjacent to the
promoter elements in most operons and in most cases the sequences of
the operator bind a repressor protein. Each operon has its specific
operator and speciﬁc repressor. For example, lac operator is present
only in the lac operon and it interacts speciﬁcally with lac repressor only.

6.8.1 The Lac operon

The elucidation of the lac operon was also a result of a close association
between a geneticist, Francois Jacob and a biochemist, J acque Monod. They
were the first to elucidate a transcriptionally regulated system. In lac operon
(here lac refers to lactose), a polycistronic structural gene is regulated by a
common promoter and regulatory genes. Such arrangement is very common
in bacteria and is referred to as operon. To name few such examples, lac
operon, trp operon, ara operon, his operon, val operon, etc.

The lac operon consists of one regulatory gene (the igene — here the
term i does not refer to inducer, rather it is derived from the word inhibitor)
and three structural genes (2, y, and a). The igene codes for the repressor
of the lac operon. The z gene codes for beta-galactosidase (Ii-gal), which
is primarily responsible for the hydrolysis of the disaccharide, lactose
into its monomeric units, galactose and glucose. The y gene codes for
permease, which increases permeability of the cell to ﬁ-galactosides. The
a gene encodes a transacetylase. Hence, all the three gene products in
lac operon are required for metabolism of lactose. In most other operons
as well, the genes present in the operon are needed together to function
in the same or related metabolic pathway (Figure 6.14).

2019-2020