Head

  
  
  
   
   
   

 

BIOLOGY

Plasma secretion of some factors which help in the
membrane process of sperrniogenesis.

Acrosome

Nucleus containing
chromosomal material

Let us examine the structure of a sperm. It
is a microscopic structure composed of a head,
neck, a middle piece and a tail (Figure 3.6). A
plasma membrane envelops the whole body of
sperm. The sperm head contains an elongated

Neck haploid nucleus, the anterior portion of which

Middle piece

Mitochondria
(energy source for swimming)

Tail

Figure 3.6 Structure of a sperm

is covered by a cap-like structure, acrosome.
The acrosome is ﬁlled with enzymes that help
fertilisation of the ovum. The middle piece
possesses numerous mitochondria, which
produce energy for the movement of tail that
facilitate sperm motility essential for fertilisation.
The human male ejaculates about 200 to 300
million sperms during a coitus of which, for
normal fertility, at least 60 per cent sperms
must have normal shape and size and at least
40 per cent of them must show vigorous
motility.

Sperms released from the seminiferous
tubules, are transported by the accessory
ducts. Secretions of epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicle and
prostate are essential for maturation and motility of sperms. The seminal
plasma along with the sperms constitute the semen. The functions of
male sex accessory ducts and glands are maintained by the testicular
hormones (androgens).

The process of formation of a mature female gamete is called oogenesis
which is markedly different from sperrnatogenesis. Oogenesis is initiated
during the embryonic development stage when a couple of million gamete
mother cells (oogonia) are formed within each fetal ovary; no more oogonia
are formed and added after birth. These cells start division and enter into
prophase—I of the meiotic division and get temporarily arrested at that stage,
called primary oocytes. Each primary oocyte then gets surrounded by a
layer of granulosa cells and is called the primary follicle (Figure 3.7). A
large number of these follicles degenerate during the phase from birth to
puberty. Therefore, at puberty only 60,000-80,000 primary follicles are
left in each ovary. The primary follicles get surrounded by more layers of
granulosa cells and a new theca and are called secondary follicles.

The secondary follicle soon transforms into a tertiary follicle which is
characterised by a ﬂuid ﬁlled cavity called antrum. The theca layer is
organised into an inner theca interna and an outer theca externa. It is
important to draw your attention that it is at this stage that the primary
oocyte within the tertiary follicle grows in size and completes its ﬁrst meiotic
division. It is an unequal division resulting in the formation of a large
haploid secondary oocyte and a tiny first polar body (Figure 3.8b). The

2019-2020