PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS

 

These graphs, together, show that most of the photosynthesis takes
place in the blue and red regions of the spectrum; some photosynthesis
does take place at the other wavelengths of the visible spectrum. Let us
see how this happens. Though chlorophyll is the major pigment
responsible for trapping light, other thylakoid pigments like chlorophyll
b, xanthophylls and carotenoids, which are called accessory pigments,
also absorb light and transfer the energy to chlorophyll a. Indeed, they
not only enable a wider range of wavelength of incoming light to be utilised
for photosyntesis but also protect chlorophyll a from photo-oxidation.

13.5 WHAT Is LIGHT REACTION?

Light reactions or the ‘Photochemical’ phase
include light absorption, water splitting, oxygen
release, and the formation of high-energy
chemical intermediates, ATP and NADPH.
Several protein complexes are involved in the
process. The pigments are organised into two
discrete photochemical light harvesting
complexes (LHC) within the Photosystem I (PS
I) and Photosystem II (PS II). These are named
in the sequence of their discovery, and not in
the sequence in which they function during the
light reaction. The LHC are made up of

Photon

hundreds of pigment molecules bound to . ,
proteins. Each photosystem has all the pigments . . .
(except one molecule of chlorophyll a) forming .

a light harvesting system also called antennae
(Figure 13.4). These pigments help to make
photosynthesis more efﬁcient by absorbing
different wavelengths of light. The single chlorophyll a molecule forms
the reaction centre. The reaction centre is different in both the
photosystems. In PS I the reaction centre chlorophyll a has an absorption
peak at 700 nm, hence is called P700, while in PS II it has absorption
maxima at 680 nm, and is called P680.

13.6 THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT

In photosystem II the reaction centre chlorophyll a absorbs 680 nm
wavelength of red light causing electrons to become excited and jump
into an orbit farther from the atomic nucleus. These electrons are picked
up by an electron acceptor which passes them to an electrons transport

  
 

Reaction
centre

Figure 13.4 The light harvesting complex