RESPIRATION IN PLANTS

synthesise a larger number of ATP molecules needed for cellular
metabolism? In eukaryotes these steps take place within the mitochondria
and this requires 02. Aerobic respiration is the process that leads to a
complete oxidation of organic substances in the presence of oxygen, and
releases C02, water and a large amount of energy present in the substrate.
This type of respiration is most common in higher organisms. We will
look at these processes in the next section.

14.4 AEROBIC RESPIRATION

For aerobic respiration to take place within the mitochondria, the ﬁnal
product of glycolysis, pyruvate is transported from the cytoplasm into
the mitochondria. The crucial events in aerobic respiration are:

‘ The complete oxidation of pyruvate by the stepwise removal of all
the hydrogen atoms, leaving three molecules of C02.

° The passing on of the electrons removed as part of the hydrogen
atoms to molecular 02 with simultaneous synthesis of ATP.

What is interesting to note is that the ﬁrst process takes place in the
matrix of the mitochondria while the second process is located on the
inner membrane of the mitochondria.

Pyruvate, which is formed by the glycolytic catabolism of carbohydrates
in the cytosol, after it enters mitochondrial matrix undergoes om'dative
decarboxylation by a complex set of reactions catalysed by pyruvic
dehydrogenase. The reactions catalysed by pyruvic dehydrogenase require

 

231

 

 

 

 

 

v

the participation of several coenzymes, including NAD’“ and Coenzyme A.

Pyruwgaéi‘mwﬂm” ‘

 

* ' Aegiyl 96A+Q®2+ @319.ng

42-—

 

During this process, two molecules of NADH are produced from the
metabolism of two molecules of pyruvic acid (produced from one glucose
molecule during glycolysis).

The acetyl CoA then enters a cyclic pathway, tricarboxylic acid cycle,
more commonly called as Krebs’ cycle after the scientist Hans Krebs who
ﬁrst elucidated it.

14.4. 1 Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle

The TCA cycle starts with the condensation of acetyl group with oxaloacetic
acid (0AA) and water to yield citric acid (Figure 14.3). The reaction is
catalysed by the enzyme citrate synthase and a molecule of CoA is released.
Citrate is then isomerised to isocitrate. It is followed by two successive
steps of decarboxylation, leading to the formation of oc-ketoglutaric acid