176

 

BIOLOGY

compounds synthesised in the photosynthetic leaves are exported to all
other parts of the plant including storage organs. From the storage organs
they are later re-exported. The mineral nutrients are taken up by the
roots and transported upwards into the stem, leaves and the growing
regions. When any plant part undergoes senescence, nutrients may be
withdrawn from such regions and moved to the growing parts. Hormones
or plant growth regulators and other chemical signals are also transported,
though in very small amounts, sometimes in a strictly polarised or
unidirectional manner from where they are synthesised to other parts.
Hence, in a ﬂowering plant there is a complex trafﬁc of compounds (but
probably very orderly) moving in different directions, each organ receiving
some substances and giving out some others.

1 1. 1 MEANS OF TRANSPORT

1 1 . 1 . 1 Diffusion

Movement by diffusion is passive, and may be from one part of the cell to
the other, or from cell to cell, or over short distances, say, from the inter-
cellular spaces of the leaf to the outside. No energy expenditure takes place.
In diffusion, molecules move in a random fashion, the net result being
substances moving from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower
concentration. Diffusion is a slow process and is not dependent on a ‘living
system’. Diffusion is obvious in gases and liquids, but diffusion in solids is
more likely rather than of solids. Diffusion is very important to plants since
it is the only means for gaseous movement within the plant body.
Diffusion rates are affected by the gradient of concentration, the
permeability of the membrane separating them, temperature and pressure.

1 l. 1.2 Facilitated Diffusion

As pointed out earlier, a gradient must already be present for diffusion to
occur. The diffusion rate depends on the size of the substances; obviously
smaller substances difﬁise faster. The diffusion of any substance across a
membrane also depends on its solubility in lipids, the major constituent of
the membrane. Substances soluble in lipids diffuse through the membrane
faster. Substances that have a hydrophilic moiety, ﬁnd it difﬁcult to pass
through the membrane; their movement has to be facilitated. Membrane
proteins provide sites at which such molecules cross the membrane. They
do not set up a concentration gradient: a concentration gradient must
already be present for molecules to diffuse even if facilitated by the proteins.
This process is called facilitated diffusion.

In facilitated diffusion special proteins help move substances across
membranes without expenditure of ATP energy. Facilitated diffusion
cannot cause net transport of molecules from a low to a high concentration
— this would require input of energy. Transport rate reaches a maximum
when all of the protein transporters are being used (saturation). Facilitated