190

 

BIOLOGY

1 1.5.2 Translocation of Mineral Ions

After the ions have reached xylem through active or passive uptake, or a
combination of the two, their further transport up the stem to all parts of
the plant is through the transpiration stream.

The chief sinks for the mineral elements are the growing regions of the
plant, such as the apical and lateral meristems, young leaves, developing
ﬂowers, fruits and seeds, and the storage organs. Unloading of mineral
ions occurs at the ﬁne vein endings through diffusion and active uptake
by these cells.

Mineral ions are frequently remobilised, particularly from older,
senescing parts. Older dying leaves export much of their mineral content
to younger leaves. Similarly, before leaf fall in decidous plants, minerals
are removed to other parts. Elements most readily mobilised are
phosphorus, sulphur, nitrogen and potassium. Some elements that are
structural components like calcium are not remobilised.

An analysis of the xylem exudates shows that though some of the
nitrogen travels as inorganic ions, much of it is carried in the organic
form as amino acids and related compounds. Similarly, small amounts
of P and S are carried as organic compounds. In addition, small amount
of exchange of materials does take place between xylem and phloem.
Hence, it is not that we can clearly make a distinction and say categorically
that xylem transports only inorganic nutrients while phloem transports
only organic materials, as was traditionally believed.

I 1.6 PHLOEM TRANSPORT: FLOW FROM SOURCE T0 SINK

Food, primarily sucrose, is transported by the vascular tissue phloem
from a source to a sink. Usually the source is understood to be that
part of the plant which synthesises the food, i.e., the leaf, and sink, the
part that needs or stores the food. But, the source and sink may be
reversed depending on the season, or the plant’s needs. Sugar stored
in roots may be mobilised to become a source of food in the early spring
when the buds of trees, act as sink; they need energy for growth and
development of the photosynthetic apparatus. Since the source-sink
relationship is variable, the direction of movement in the phloem can
be upwards or downwards, i.e., bi-directional. This contrasts with
that of the xylem where the movement is always unidirectional, i.e.,
upwards. Hence, unlike one-way ﬂow of water in transpiration, food
in phloem sap can be transported in any required direction so long
as there is a source of sugar and a sink able to use, store or remove
the sugar.

Phloem sap is mainly water and sucrose, but other sugars, hormones
and amino acids are also transported or translocated through phloem.