202

 

BIOLOGY

called biological nitrogen ﬁxation. The enzyme, nitrogenase which is
capable of nitrogen reduction is present exclusively in prokaryotes. Such
microbes are called N2" ﬁxers.

Nitrogenase

NEN NHS

The nitrogen-ﬁxing microbes could be free-living or symbiotic. Examples
of free-living nitrogen-ﬁxing aerobic microbes are Azotobacter and
Beyerinckia while Rhodospirillum is anaerobic and free-living. In addition,
a number of cyanobacteria such as Anabaena and Nostoc are also free-
living nitrogen-fixers.

Symbiotic biological nitrogen ﬁxation

Several types of symbiotic biological nitrogen ﬁxing associations are known.
The most prominent among them is the legume-bacteria relationship.
Species of rod-shaped Rhizobium has such relationship with the roots of
several legumes such as alfalfa, sweet clover, sweet pea, lentils, garden pea,
broad bean, clover beans, etc. The most common association on roots is
as nodules. These nodules are small outgrowths on the roots. The microbe,
Frankia, also produces nitrogen-ﬁxing nodules on the roots of non-
leguminous plants (e.g., Alnus). Both Rhizobium and Frankia are free-
living in soil, but as symbionts, can ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen.

Uproot any one plant of a common pulse, just before ﬂowering. You
will see near-spherical outgrowths on the roots. These are nodules. If
you cut through them you will notice that the central portion is red or
pink. What makes the nodules pink? This is due to the presence of
leguminous haemoglobin or leg-haemoglobin.

Nodule Formation

Nodule formation involves a sequence of multiple interactions between
Rhizobium and roots of the host plant. Principal stages in the nodule
formation are summarised as follows:

Rhizobia multiply and colonise the surroundings of roots and get attached
to epidermal and root hair cells. The root-hairs curl and the bacteria invade
the root-hair. An infection thread is produced carrying the bacteria into
the cortex of the root, where they initiate the nodule formation in the cortex
of the root. Then the bacteria are released from the thread into the cells
which leads to the differentiation of specialised nitrogen ﬁxing cells. The
nodule thus formed, establishes a direct vascular connection with the host
for exchange of nutrients. These events are depicted in Figure 12.4.

The nodule contains all the necessary biochemical components, such
as the enzyme nitrogenase and leghaemoglobin. The enzyme nitrogenase
is a Mo-Fe protein and catalyses the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen
to ammonia, (Figure 12.5) the ﬁrst stable product of nitrogen ﬁxation.