PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

chromosomes, are produced by females, i.e., female heterogamety. In
order to have a distinction with the mechanism of sex determination
described earlier, the two different sex chromosomes of a female bird has
been designated to be the Z and W chromosomes. In these organisms the
females have one Z and one W chromosome, whereas males have a pair of
Z—chromosomes besides the autosomes.

5.6. 1 Sex Determination in Humans

It has already been mentioned that the sex determining mechanism in
case of humans is XY type. Out of 23 pairs of chromosomes present,
22 pairs are exactly same in both males and females; these are the
autosomes. A pair of X—chromosomes are present in the female, whereas
the presence of an X and Y chromosome are determinant of the male
characteristic. During spermatogenesis among males, two types of
gametes are produced. 50 per cent of the total sperm produced carry
the X—chromosome and the rest 50 per cent has Y—chromosome besides
the autosomes. Females, however, produce only one type of ovum with
an X—chromosome. There is an equal probability of fertilisation of the
ovum with the sperm carrying either X or Y chromosome. In case the
ovum fertilises with a sperm carrying X—chromosome the zygote develops
into a female (XX) and the fertilisation of ovum with Y—chromosome
carrying sperm results into a male offspring. Thus, it is evident that it
is the genetic makeup of the sperm that determines the sex of the child.
It is also evident that in each pregnancy there is always 50 per cent
probability of either a male or a female child. It is unfortunate that in
our society women are blamed for giving birth to female children and
have been ostracised and ill-treated because of this false notion.

5.6.2 Sex Determination in Honey Bee

The sex determination in honey bee is

based on the number of sets of parents Female Mlale
chromosomes an individual receives. An 3&2 *6
offspring formed from the union of a Meiosis Mitosis
sperm and an egg develops as a female H l
(queen or worker), and an unfertilised Gametes‘
egg develops as a male (drone) by means + t

of parthenogenesis. This means that the F1: Male Female
males have half the number of 16 32
chromosomes than that of a female. The Figure 5.13 Sex determination in honey bee

females are diploid having 32
chromosomes and males are haploid, i.e., having 16 chromosomes.
This is called as haplodiploid sex-determination system and has special
characteristic features such as the males produce sperms by mitosis
(Figure 5.13), they do not have father and thus cannot have sons, but
have a grandfather and can have grandsons.

How is the sex-determination mechanism different in the birds?
Is the sperm or the egg responsible for the sex of the chicks?

2019-2020