232

 

BIOLOGY

a particular set of selection pressures, organisms evolve towards the most
efﬁcient reproductive strategy. Some organisms breed only once in their
lifetime (Paciﬁc salmon ﬁsh, bamboo) while others breed many times
during their lifetime (most birds and mammals). Some produce a large
number of small-sized offspring (Oysters, pelagic ﬁshes) while others
produce a small number of large-sized offspring (birds, mammals). So,
which is desirable for maximising ﬁtness? Ecologists suggest that life
history traits of organisms have evolved in relation to the constraints
imposed by the abiotic and biotic components of the habitat in which
they live. Evolution of life history traits in different species is currently an
important area of research being conducted by ecologists.

13.2.4 Population Interactions

Can you think of any natural habitat on earth that is inhabited just by a
single species? There is no such habitat and such a situation is even
inconceivable. For any species, the minimal requirement is one more
species on which it can feed. Even a plant species, which makes its own
food, cannot suivive alone; it needs soil microbes to break down the organic
matter in soil and return the inorganic nutrients for absorption. And then,
how will the plant manage pollination without an animal agent? It is
obvious that in nature, animals, plants and microbes do not and cannot
live in isolation but interact in various ways to form a biological
community. Even in minimal communities, many interactive linkages
exist, although all may not be readily apparent.

Interspeciﬁc interactions arise from the interaction of populations of
two different species. They could be beneﬁcial, detrimental or neutral
(neither harm nor beneﬁt) to one of the species or both. Assigning a ‘+’
sign for beneﬁcial interaction, ‘-’ sign for detrimental and O for neutral
interaction, let us look at all the possible outcomes of interspecific
interactions (Table 1 3. 1) .

Table 13.1 : Population Interactions

‘ Species A Species B Name of Interaction

l + + M utualism
I — — Competition
| + — Predation
I + — Parasitism
l + 0 Commensalism

 

I — 0 Amensalism

Both the species beneﬁt in mutualism and both lose in competition in
their interactions with each other. In both parasitism and predation only
one species beneﬁts (parasite and predator, respectively) and the interaction

2019-2020