44

 

BIOLOGY

The gymnosperms are the plants in which ovules are not enclosed by any
ovary wall. After fertilisation the seeds remain exposed and therefore these plants
are called naked-seeded plants. The gymnosperms produce microspores and
megaspores which are produced in microsporangia and megasporangia borne on
the sporophylls. The sporophylls — microsporophylls and megasporophylls — are
arranged spirally on axis to form male and female cones, respectively. The pollen
grain gerrninates and pollen tube releases the male gamete into the ovule, where it
fuses with the egg cell in archegonia. Following fertilisation, the zygote develops
into embryo and the ovules into seeds.

In angiosperms, the male sex organs (stamen) and female sex organs (pistil)
are borne in a ﬂower. Each stamen consists of a ﬁlament and an anther. The anther
produces pollen grains (male gametophyte) after meiosis. The pistil consists of an
ovary enclosing one to many ovules. Within the ovule is the female gametophyte
or embryo sac which contains the egg cell. The pollen tube enters the embryo-sac
where two male gametes are discharged. One male gamete fuses with egg cell
(syngamy) and other fuses with diploid sec dary nucleus (tnple fusion). This
phenomenon of two fusions is called di‘gu le fertilisatfb grid is unique to
angiosperms. The angiosperms are drvai’i ed into>two claS'sgs — the dicotyledons
and the monocotyledons. If”: \{V :4”; Q 4%” g

During the life cycle of any se ‘ y'r/egproducmglplant there is alternation of
generations between gamete producmgflilaplmd gametophyte and spore producing
diploid sporophyte. However, different plant groups as well as individuals may
show different patterns of life cycles — haplontic, diplontic or intermediate.

 
 

EXERCISES

What is the basis of classification of algae?

2. When and where does reduction division take place in the life cycle of a liverwort,
a moss, a fern, a gymnosperrn and an angiosperm?

3. Name three groups of plants that bear archegonia. Brieﬂy describe the life cycle
of any one of them.

4. Mention the ploidy of the following: protonemal cell of a moss; primary endosperm
nucleus in dicot, leaf cell of a moss; prothallus cell of a ferm; gemma cell in
Marchantia; meristem cell of monocot, ovum of a liverwort, and zygote of a fern.

5. Write a note on economic importance of algae and gymnosperms.

6. Both gymnosperms and angiosperms bear seeds, then why are they classified
separately?

7. What is heterospory? Brieﬂy comment on its signiﬁcance. Give two examples.