STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

testes occur in the 10m and 1 1“‘ segment, respectively. A pair of ovaries are present
on 12 and 13m intersegmental septum. It is a protandrous animal with cross-
fertilisation. Fertilisation and development take place in cocoon secreted by the
glands of clitellum.

The body of Cockroach (Periplaneta americana) is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. It is divided into head, thorax and abdomen. Segments bear jointed
appendages. There are three segments of thorax, each bearing a pair of walking
legs. Two pairs of wings are present, one pair each on 2nd and 3rd segment. There
are ten segments in abdomen. Alimentary canal is well developed with a mouth
surrounded by mouth parts, a pharynx, oesophagus, crop, gizzard, midgut,
hindgut and anus. Hepatic caecae are present at the junction of foregut and
midgut. Malpighian tubules are present at the junction of midgut and hindgut
and help in excretion. A pair of salivary gland is present near crop. The blood
vascular system is of open type. Respiration takes place by network of tracheae.
Trachea opens outside with spiracles. Nervous system is represented by
segmentally arranged ganglia and ventral nerve cord. A pair of testes is present in
4m- 6th segments and ovaries in 2’1‘1-6th segments. Fertilisation is internal. Female
produces 9- 10 ootheca bearing developing embryos. After rupturing of single
ootheca sixteen young ones, called nymphs come out.

The Indian bullfrog, Rana tigrina, is the common frog found in India. Body is
covered by skin. Mucous glands are present in the skin which is highly vasculaIised
and helps in respiration in water and on land. Body is divisible into head and trunk.
A muscular tongue is present, which is bilobed at the tip and is used in capturing
the prey. The alimentary canal consists of oesophagous, stomach, intestine and
rectum, which open into the cloaca. The main digestive glands are liver and pancreas.
It can respire in water through skin and through lungs on land. Circulatory system
is closed with single circulation. RBCs are nucleated. Nervous system is organised
into central, peripheral and autonomic. The organs of urinogenital system are kidneys
and urinogenital ducts, which open into the cloaca. The male reproductive organ is
a pair of testes. The female reproductive organ is a pair of ovaiies. A female lays
2500-3000 ova at a time. The fertilisation and development are external. The eggs
hatch into tadpoles, which metamorphose into frogs.

EXERCISES

1. Answer in one word or one line.

(1) Give the common name of Periplanata americana.

(ii) How many spennathecae are found in earthworm?

(iii) What is the position of ovaries in cochoach?

(iv) How many segments are present in the abdomen of cochoach?
(v) Where do you find Malpighian tubules?

    

121