BIOLOGY

composed of equal amounts of this hybrid DNA and of ‘light’
DNA.

If E. coli was allowed to grow for 80 minutes then what would be the
proportions of light and hybrid densities DNA molecule?

Very similar experiments involving use of radioactive thymidine to
detect distribution of newly synthesised DNA in the chromosomes was
performed on Viciafaba (faba beans) by Taylor and colleagues in 1958.
The experiments proved that the DNA in chromosomes also replicate
semiconservatively.

6.4.2 The Machinery and the Enzymes

In living cells, such as E. coli, the process of replication requires a set of
catalysts (enzymes). The main enzyme is referred to as DNA-dependent
DNA polymerase, since it uses a DNA template to catalyse the
polymerisation of deoxynucleotides. These enzymes are highly efficient
enzymes as they have to catalyse polymerisation of a large number of
nucleotides in a very short time. E. coli that has only 4.6 X 10‘5 bp (compare
it with human whose diploid content is 6.6 X 109 bp), completes the
process of replication within 18 minutes; that means the average rate of
polymerisation has to be approximately 2000 bp per second. Not only do
these polymerases have to be fast, but they also have to catalyse the reaction
with high degree of accuracy. Any mistake during replication would result
into mutations. Furthermore, energetically replication is a very expensive
process. Deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates serve dual purposes. In
addition to acting as substrates, they provide energy for polymerisation
reaction (the two terminal phosphates in a deoxynucleoside triphosphates
are high-energy phosphates, same as in case of ATP).

In addition to DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, many additional
enzymes are required to complete the process of replication with high
degree of accuracy. For long DNA molecules, since the two strands of
DNA cannot be separated in its entire length (due to very high energy
requirement), the replication occur within a small opening of the DNA
helix, referred to as replication fork. The DNA-dependent DNA
polymerases catalyse polymerisation only in one direction, that is 5,93,.
This creates some additional complications at the replicating fork.
Consequently, on one strand (the template with polarity 395'), the
replication is continuous, while on the other (the template with
polarity 593'), it is discontinuous. The discontinuously synthesised
fragments are later joined by the enzyme DNA ligase (Figure 6.8).

The DNA polymerases on their own cannot initiate the process of
replication. Also the replication does not initiate randomly at any place
in DNA. There is a definite region in E. coli DNA where the replication
originates. Such regions are termed as origin of replication. It is

2019—2020