220

 

BIOLOGY

rich in an enzyme Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase
(RuBisCO), but lack PEPcase. Thus, the basic pathway that results in
the formation of the sugars, the Calvin pathway, is common to the C3 and
C 4 plants.

Did you note that the Calvin pathway occurs in all the mesophyll
cells of the C3 plants? In the C4 plants it does not take place in the
mesophyll cells but does so only in the bundle sheath cells.

13.9 PHOTORESPIRATION

Let us try and understand one more process that creates an important
difference between C3 and C 4 plants — Photorespiration. To understand
photorespiration we have to know a little bit more about the ﬁrst step of
the Calvin pathway — the ﬁrst CO2 fixation step. This is the reaction
where RuBP combines with CO2 to form 2 molecules of 3PGA, that is
catalysed by RuBisCO.

RuBisCO that is the most abundant enzyme in the world (Do you
wonder why?) is characterised by the fact that its active site can bind to
both CO2 and O2 — hence the name. Can you think how this could be
possible? RuBisCO has a much greater affinity for CO2 when the C02: 02
is nearly equal. Imagine what would happen if this were not so! This
binding is competitive. It is the relative concentration of O2 and CO2 that
determines which of the two will bind to the enzyme.

In C3 plants some 02 does bind to RuBisCO, and hence CO2 ﬁxation is
decreased. Here the RuBP instead of being converted to 2 molecules of
PGA binds with O2 to form one molecule of phosphoglycerate and
phosphoglycolate (2 Carbon) in a pathway called photorespiration. In
the photorespiratory pathway, there is neither synthesis of sugars, nor of
ATP. Rather it results in the release of CO2 with the utilisation of ATP. In
the photorespiratory pathway there is no synthesis of ATP or NADPH.
The biological function of photorespiration is not known yet.

In C 4 plants photorespiration does not occur. This is because they
have a mechanism that increases the concentration of CO2 at the enzyme
site. This takes place when the C 4 acid from the mesophyll is broken
down in the bundle sheath cells to release CO2 — this results in increasing
the intracellular concentration of C02. In turn, this ensures that the
RuBisCO functions as a carboxylase minimising the oxygenase activity.

Now that you know that the C 4 plants lack photorespiration, you
probably can understand why productivity and yields are better in these
plants. In addition these plants show tolerance to higher temperatures.

Based on the above discussion can you compare plants showing
the C3 and the C4 pathway? Use the table format given and ﬁll in the
information.