(i)

(ii)

 

BIOLOGY

Regulate: Some organisms are able to maintain homeostasis by
physiological (sometimes behavioural also) means which ensures
constant body temperature, constant osmotic concentration, etc.
All birds and mammals, and a very few lower vertebrate and
invertebrate species are indeed capable of such regulation
(thermoregulation and osmoregulation). Evolutionary biologists
believe that the ‘success’ of mammals is largely due to their ability
to maintain a constant body temperature and thrive whether they
live in Antarctica or in the Sahara desert.

The mechanisms used by most mammals to regulate their body

temperature are similar to the ones that we humans use. We maintain
a constant body temperature of 37°C. In summer, when outside
temperature is more than our body temperature, we sweat profusely.
The resulting evaporative cooling, similar to what happens with a
desert cooler in operation, brings down the body temperature. In
winter when the temperature is much lower than 37 0C, we start to
shiver, a kind of exercise which produces heat and raises the body
temperature. Plants, on the other hand, do not have such
mechanisms to maintain internal temperatures.
Conform : An overwhelming majority (99 per cent) of animals and
nearly all plants cannot maintain a constant internal environment.
Their body temperature changes with the ambient temperature. In
aquatic animals, the osmotic concentration of the body ﬂuids
change with that of the ambient air, water osmotic concentration.
These animals and plants are simply conformers. Considering the
beneﬁts of a constant internal environment to the organism, we must
ask why these conformers had not evolved to become regulators.
Recall the human analogy we used above; much as they like, how
many people can really afford an air conditioner? Many simply
‘sweat it out’ and resign themselves to suboptimal performance in
hot summer months. Thermoregulation is energetically expensive
for many organisms. This is particularly true for small animals like
shrews and humming birds. Heat loss or heat gain is a function of
surface area. Since small animals have a larger surface area relative
to their volume, they tend to lose body heat very fast when it is cold
outside; then they have to expend much energy to generate body
heat through metabolism. This is the main reason why very small
animals are rarely found in polar regions. During the course of
evolution, the costs and beneﬁts of maintaining a constant internal
environment are taken into consideration. Some species have evolved
the ability to regulate, but only over a limited range of environmental
conditions, beyond which they simply conform.

If the stressful external conditions are localised or remain only
for a short duration, the organism has two other alternatives for

survival.

2019-2020