NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION

2 1 .4. l Forebrain

The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and hypothalamus
(Figure 2 1.4). Cerebrum forms the major part of the human brain. A deep
cleft divides the cerebrum longitudinally into two halves, which are termed
as the left and right cerebral hemispheres. The hemispheres are
connected by a tract of nerve ﬁbres called corpus callosum. The layer of
cells which covers the cerebral hemisphere is called cerebral cortex and is
thrown into prominent folds. The cerebral cortex is referred to as the grey
matter due to its greyish appearance. The neuron cell bodies are
concentrated here giving the colour. The cerebral cortex contains motor
areas, sensory areas and large regions that are neither clearly sensory
nor motor in function. These regions called as the association areas are
responsible for complex functions like intersensory associations, memory
and communication. Fibres of the tracts are covered with the myelin sheath,
which constitute the inner part of cerebral hemisphere. They give an
opaque white appearance to the layer and, hence, is called the white matter.
The cerebrum wraps around a structure called thalamus, which is a major
coordinating centre for sensory and motor signaling. Another very
important part of the brain called hypothalamus lies at the base of the
thalamus. The hypothalamus contains a number of centres which control
body temperature, urge for eating and drinking. It also contains several
groups of neurosecretory cells, which secrete hormones called
hypothalamic hormones. The inner parts of cerebral hemispheres and a
group of associated deep structures like amygdala, hippocampus, etc.,
form a complex structure called the limbic lobe or limbic system. Along
with the hypothalamus, it is involved in the regulation of sexual behaviour,
expression of emotional reactions (e.g., excitement, pleasure, rage and
fear), and motivation.

2 l .4.2 Midbrain

The midbrain is located between the thalamus / hypothalamus of the
forebrain and pons of the hindbrain. A canal called the cerebral aqueduct
passess through the midbrain. The dorsal portion of the midbrain consists
mainly of four round swellings (lobes) called corpora quadrigemina.

2 1 .4. 3 Hindbrain

The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla (also called
the medulla oblongata). Pons consists of ﬁbre tracts that interconnect
different regions of the brain. Cerebellum has very convoluted surface in
order to provide the additional space for many more neurons. The medulla
of the brain is connected to the spinal cord. The medulla contains centres
which control respiration, cardiovascular reﬂexes and gastric secretions.

Three major regions make up the brain stem; mid brain, pons
and medulla oblongata. Brain stem forms the connections between

the brain and spinal cord.

 

321