178

BIOLOGY

molecule moves across a membrane independent of other molecules, the
process is called uniport.

1 1 . 1 .3 Active Transport

Active transport uses energy to transport and pump molecules against a
concentration gradient. Active transport is carried out by specific
membrane-proteins. Hence different proteins in the membrane play a
major role in both active as well as passive transport. Pumps are proteins
that use energy to carry substances across the cell membrane. These
pumps can transport substances from a low concentration to a high
concentration (‘uphill’ transport). Transport rate reaches a maximum
when all the protein transporters are being used or are saturated. Like
enzymes the carrier protein is very specific in what it carries across the
membrane. These proteins are sensitive to inhibitors that react with protein
side chains.

1 1 . 1 .4 Comparison of Different Transport Processes

Table l 1.1 gives a comparison of the different transport mechanisms.
Proteins in the membrane are responsible for facilitated diffusion and
active transport and hence show common characterstics of being highly
selective; they are liable to saturate, respond to inhibitors and are under
hormonal regulation. But diffusion whether facilitated or not — take place
only along a gradient and do not use energy.

TABLE 11.1 Comparison of Different Transport Mechanisms

Property Simple Facilitated Active
Diffusion Transport Transport
Requires special membrane proteins No Yes Yes
Highly selective No Yes Yes
Transport saturates No Yes Yes
Uphill transport No No Yes
Requires ATP energy No No Yes

1 1.2 PLANT-WATER RELATIONS

Water is essential for all physiological activities of the plant and plays a
very important role in all living organisms. It provides the medium in
which most substances are dissolved. The protoplasm of the cells is
nothing but water in which different molecules are dissolved and (several
particles) suspended. A watermelon has over 92 per cent water; most
herbaceous plants have only about 10 to 15 per cent of its fresh weight
as dry matter. Of course, distribution of water within a plant varies —
woody parts have relatively very little water, while soft parts mostly contain

2019-2020