BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES

the bacterium through pores in its cell wall. Recombinant DNA can then
be forced into such cells by incubating the cells with recombinant DNA
on ice, followed by placing them brieﬂy at 42°C (heat shock), and then
putting them back on ice. This enables the bacteria to take up the
recombinant DNA.

This is not the only way to introduce alien DNA into host cells. In a
method known as micro-injection, recombinant DNA is directly injected
into the nucleus of an animal cell. In another method, suitable for plants,
cells are bombarded with high velocity micro-particles of gold or tungsten
coated with DNA in a method known as biolistics or gene gun. And the
last method uses ‘disarmed pathogen’ vectors, which when allowed to
infect the cell, transfer the recombinant DNA into the host.

Now that we have learnt about the tools for constructing recombinant
DNA, let us discuss the processes facilitating recombinant DNA technology.

1 1.3 PROCESSES OF RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY

Recombinant DNA technology involves several steps in speciﬁc
sequence such as isolation of DNA, fragmentation of DNA by
restriction endonucleases, isolation Of a desired DNA fragment,
ligation of the DNA fragment into a vector, transferring the
recombinant DNA into the host, culturing the host cells in a
medium at large scale and extraction of the desired product.
Let us examine each of these steps in some details.

1 1.3. 1 Isolation Of the Genetic Material (DNA)

Recall that nucleic acid is the genetic material Of all organisms
without exception. In majority of organisms this is
deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA. In order to cut the DNA with
restriction enzymes, it needs to be in pure form, free from other
macro-molecules. Since the DNA is enclosed within the
membranes, we have to break the cell Open to release DNA along
with other macromolecules such as RNA, proteins,
polysaccharides and also lipids. This can be achieved by treating

 

 

the bacterial cells / plant or animal tissue with enzymes such as Figure 1 1-5 DNA that

lysozyme (bacteria), cellulase (plant cells), chitinase (fungus).
You know that genes are located on long molecules Of DNA
interwined with proteins such as histones. The RNA can be removed by
treatment with ribonuclease whereas proteins can be removed by
treatment with protease. Other molecules can be removed by appropriate
treatments and puriﬁed DNA ultimately precipitates out after the addition
of chilled ethanol. This can be seen as collection of ﬁne threads in the
suspension (Figure 1 1.5).

2019—2020

separates out can be
removed by SpOOling