MINERAL NUTRITION

membrane, maintenance of osmotic concentration of cell sap, electron-
transport systems, buffering action, enzymatic activity and act as major
constituents of macromolecules and co-enzymes.

Various forms and functions of essential nutrient elements are given
below.

Nitrogen: This is the essential nutrient element required by plants in the
greatest amount. It is absorbed mainly as NO; though some are also taken
up as NO; or NH 4". Nitrogen is required by all parts of a plant, particularly
the meristematic tissues and the metabolically active cells. Nitrogen is one of
the major constituents of proteins, nucleic acids, vitamins and hormones.

Phosphorus: Phosphorus is absorbed by the plants from soil in the form
of phosphate ions (either as HZPO:1 or HPOZ‘ ). Phosphorus is a
constituent of cell membranes, certain proteins, all nucleic acids and
nucleotides, and is required for all phosphorylation reactions.

Potassium: It is absorbed as potassium ion (K+). In plants, this is required
in more abundant quantities in the meristematic tissues, buds, leaves
and root tips. Potassium helps to maintain an anion-cation balance in
cells and is involved in protein synthesis, opening and closing of stomata,
activation of enzymes and in the maintenance of the turgidity of cells.

Calcium: Plant absorbs calcium from the soil in the form of calcium ions
(Ca2+). Calcium is required by meristematic and differentiating tissues.
During cell division it is used in the synthesis of cell wall, particularly as
calcium pectate in the middle lamella. It is also needed during the
formation of mitotic spindle. It accumulates in older leaves. It is involved
in the normal functioning of the cell membranes. It activates certain
enzymes and plays an important role in regulating metabolic activities.

Magnesium: It is absorbed by plants in the form of divalent Mg”. It
activates the enzymes of respiration, photosynthesis and are involved in
the synthesis of DNA and RNA. Magnesium is a constituent of the ring
structure of chlorophyll and helps to maintain the ribosome structure.

Sulphur: Plants obtain sulphur in the form of sulphate (SOZ‘) . Sulphur is
present in two amino acids — cysteine and methionine and is the main
constituent of several coenzymes, vitamins (thiamine, biotin, Coenzyme A)
and ferredoxin.

Iron: Plants obtain iron in the form of ferric ions (Fe3+). It is required in
larger amounts in comparison to other micronutrients. It is an important
constituent of proteins involved in the transfer of electrons like ferredoxin
and cytochromes. It is reversibly oxidised from Fe2+ to Fe3+ during electron
transfer. It activates catalase enzyme, and is essential for the formation of
chlorophyll.

197