TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

water. A seed may appear dry but it still has water — otherwise it would
not be alive and respiring!

Terrestrial plants take up huge amount water daily but most of it is
lost to the air through evaporation from the leaves, i.e., transpiration. A
mature corn plant absorbs almost three litres of water in a day, while a
mustard plant absorbs water equal to its own weight in about 5 hours.
Because of this high demand for water, it is not surprising that water is
often the limiting factor for plant growth and productivity in both
agricultural and natural environments.

1 1 .2. 1 Water Potential

To comprehend plant-water relations, an understanding of certain
standard terms is necessary. Water potential (WW) is a concept
fundamental to understanding water movement. Solute potential
01’s) and pressure potential (WP) are the two main components that
determine water potential.

Water molecules possess kinetic energy. In liquid and gaseous form
they are in random motion that is both rapid and constant. The greater
the concentration of water in a system, the greater is its kinetic energy or
‘water potential’. Hence, it is obvious that pure water will have the greatest
water potential. If two systems containing water are in contact, random
movement of water molecules will result in net movement of water
molecules from the system with higher energy to the one with lower energy.
Thus water will move from the system containing water at higher water
potential to the one having low water potential This process of movement
of substances down a gradient of free energy is called diffusion. Water
potential is denoted by the Greek symbol Psi or ‘l‘ and is expressed in
pressure units such as pascals (Pa). By convention, the water potential
of pure water at standard temperatures, which is not under any pressure,
is taken to be zero.

If some solute is dissolved in pure water, the solution has fewer free
water molecules and the concentration (free energy) of water decreases,
reducing its water potential. Hence, all solutions have a lower water potential
than pure water; the magnitude of this lowering due to dissolution of a
solute is called solute potential or ‘PS. ‘1; is always negative. The more
the solute molecules, the lower (more negative) is the ‘PS . For a solution at
atmospheric pressure (water potential) ‘Pw = (solute potential) ‘PS.

If a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure
water or a solution, its water potential increases. It is equivalent to
pumping water from one place to another. Can you think of any system
in our body where pressure is built up? Pressure can build up in a plant
system when water enters a plant cell due to diffusion causing a pressure
built up against the cell wall, it makes the cell turgid (see section 1 1.2.2);

179