300

 

BIOLOGY

minute (GFR). J GA, a specialised portion of the nephrons. plays a signiﬁcant role
in the regulation of GFR. Nearly 99 per cent reabsorption of the ﬁltrate takes place
through different parts of the nephrons. PCT is the major site of reabsorption and
selective secretion. HL primarily helps to maintain osmolar gradient
(300 mOsmolL‘1 - 1200 mOsmolL‘l) within the kidney interstitium. DOT and
collecting duct allow extensive reabsorption of water and certain electrolytes, which
help in osmoregulation: H’“, K’“ and NH3 could be secreted into the ﬁltrate by the
tubules to maintain the ionic balance and pH of body ﬂuids.

A counter current mechanism operates between the two limbs of the loop of
Henle and those of vasa recta (capillary parallel to Henle’s loop). The ﬁltrate gets
concentrated as it moves down the descending limb but is diluted by the ascending
limb. Electrolytes and urea are retained in the interstitium by this arrangement.
DOT and collecting duct concentrate the ﬁltrate about four times, i.e., from 300
mOsmolL‘1 to 1200 mOsmolL‘l, an excellent mechanism of conservation of water.
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder till a voluntary signal from CNS carries out
its release through urethra, i.e., micturitio ‘ ;" kin, lungs and liver also assist in
excretion. ‘ \ '

  

EXERCISES

1. Deﬁne Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)

Explain the autoregulatory mechanism of GFR.

3. Indicate whether the following statements are true or false :

(a) Micturition is carried out by a reﬂex.

(b) ADH helps in water elimination, making the urine hypotonic.

(c) Protein-free ﬂuid is ﬁltered from blood plasma into the Bowman’s capsule.
(d) Henle’s loop plays an important role in concentrating the urine.

(e) Glucose is actively reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.

.10

4. Give a brief account of the counter current mechanism.
5. Describe the role of liver, lungs and skin in excretion.
6. Explain micturition.
7. Match the items of column I with those of column 11 :
Column I Column II
(a) Ammonotelism (i) Birds
(b) Bowman’s capsule (ii) Water reabsorption
(c) Micturition (iii) Bony ﬁsh
(d) Uricotelism (iv) Urinary bladder

(d) ADH (v) Renal tubule