MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS

5.5. 1 .3 Androecium

Androecium is composed of stamens. Each stamen which
represents the male reproductive organ consists of a stalk or a
filament and an anther. Each anther is usually bilobed and each
lobe has two chambers, the pollen-sacs. The pollen grains are
produced in pollen-sacs. A sterile stamen is called staminode.

Stamens of ﬂower may be united with other members such as
petals or among themselves. When stamens are attached to the
petals, they are epipetalous as in brinjal, or epiphyllous when
attached to the perianth as in the ﬂowers of lily. The stamens in a
ﬂower may either remain free (polyandrous) or may be united in
varying degrees. The stamens may be united into one bunch or
one bundle (monoadelphous) as in china rose, or two bundles
(diadelphous) as in pea, or into more than two bundles
(polyadelphous) as in citrus. There may be a variation in the length
of filaments within a ﬂower, as in Salvia and mustard.

5.5. 1 .4 Gynoecium

Gynoecium is the female reproductive part of the ﬂower and is made
up of one or more carpels. A carpel consists of three parts namely
stigma, style and ovary. Ovary is the enlarged basal part, on which
lies the elongated tube, the style. The style connects the ovary to the
stigma. The stigma is usually at the tip of the style and is the
receptive surface for pollen grains. Each ovary bears one or more
ovules attached to a ﬂattened, cushion-like placenta. When more
than one carpel is present, they may be free (as in lotus and rose)
and are called apocarpous. They are termed syncarpous when
carpels are fused, as in mustard and tomato. After fertilisation, the
ovules develop into seeds and the ovary matures into a fruit.

Placentation: The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known
as placentation. The placentation are of different types namely,
marginal, axile, parietal, basal, central and free central (Figure 5.16).
In marginal placentation the placenta forms a ridge along the
ventral suture of the ovary and the ovules are borne on this ridge
forming two rows, as in pea. When the placenta is axial and the
ovules are attached to it in a multilocular ovary, the placentaion is
said to be axile, as in china rose, tomato and lemon. In parietal
placentation, the ovules develop on the inner wall of the ovary or
on peripheral part. Ovary is one-chambered but it becomes two-
chambered due to the formation of the false septum, e.g., mustard
and Argemone. When the ovules are borne on central axis and
septa are absent, as in Dianthus and Primrose the placentation is

2019-2020

75

 

(b)

 

 

(6)

Figure 5.16 Types of
placentation :
(a) Marginal
(b) Axile
(c) Parietal
(d) Free central
(e) Basal