BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES

sets of primers (small chemically synthesised oligonucleotides that are
complementary to the regions of DNA) and the enzyme DNA polymerase.
The enzyme extends the primers using the nucleotides provided in the
reaction and the genomic DNA as template. If the process of replication
of DNA is repeated many times, the segment of DNA can be ampliﬁed
to approximately billion times, i.e., 1 billion copies are made. Such
repeated ampliﬁcation is achieved by the use of a thermostable DNA
polymerase (isolated from a bacterium, Thermus aquaticus), which
remain active during the high temperature induced denaturation of
double stranded DNA. The ampliﬁed fragment if desired can now be
used to ligate with a vector for further cloning (Figurel 1.6).

1 1.3.4 Insertion of Recombinant DNA into the Host
Cell / Organism

There are several methods of introducing the ligated DNA into recipient
cells. Recipient cells after making them ‘competent’ to receive, take up
DNA present in its surrounding. So, if a recombinant DNA bean'ng gene
for resistance to an antibiotic (e. g., ampicillin) is transferred into E. coli
cells, the host cells become transformed into ampicillin-resistant cells. If
we spread the transformed cells on agar plates containing ampicillin, only
transformants will grow, untransformed recipient cells will die. Since, due
to ampicillin resistance gene, one is able to select a transformed cell in the
presence of ampicillin. ’Ihe ampicillin resistance gene in this case is called
a selectable marker.

1 1.3.5 Obtaining the Foreign Gene Product

When you insert a piece of alien DNA into a cloning vector and transfer it
into a bacterial, plant or animal cell, the alien DNA gets multiplied. In
almost all recombinant technologies, the ultimate aim is to produce a
desirable protein. Hence, there is a need for the recombinant DNA to be
expressed. The foreign gene gets expressed under appropriate conditions.
The expression of foreign genes in host cells involve understanding many
technical details.

After having cloned the gene of interest and having optimised the
conditions to induce the expression of the target protein, one has to
consider producing it on a large scale. Can you think of any reason
why there is a need for large-scale production? If any protein encoding
gene is expressed in a heterologous host, it is called a recombinant
protein. The cells harbouring cloned genes of interest may be grown
on a small scale in the laboratory. The cultures may be used for
extracting the desired protein and then purifying it by using different
separation techniques.

The cells can also be multiplied in a continuous culture system wherein
the used medium is drained out from one side while fresh medium is
added from the other to maintain the cells in their physiologically most

2019—2020

203