PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

in the chromosome. DNA is the carrier of genetic information. It is hence
transmitted from one generation to the other without any change or
alteration. However, changes or alteration do take place occasionally. Such
an alteration or change in the genetic material is referred to as mutation.
A number of disorders in human beings have been found to be associated
with the inheritance of changed or altered genes or chromosomes.

5.8.2 Mendelian Disorders

Broadly, genetic disorders may be grouped into two categories — Mendelian
disorders and Chromosomal disorders. Mendelian disorders are mainly
determined by alteration or mutation in the single gene. These disorders
are transmitted to the offspring on the same lines as we have studied in
the principle of inheritance. The pattern of inheritance of such Mendelian
disorders can be traced in a family by the pedigree analysis. Most common
and prevalent Mendelian disorders are Haemophilia, Cystic ﬁbrosis, Sickle-
cell anaemia, Colour blindness, Phenylketonuria, Thalassemia, etc. It is
important to mention here that such Mendelian disorders may be
dominant or recessive. By pedigree analysis one can easily understand
whether the trait in question is dominant or recessive. Similarly, the trait
may also be linked to the sex chromosome as in case of haemophilia. It is
evident that this X—linked recessive trait shows transmission from carrier
female to male progeny. A representative pedigree is shown in Figure 5. 14
for dominant and recessive traits. Discuss with your teacher and design
pedigrees for characters linked to both autosomes and sex chromosome.

(b)

 

 

Figure 5.14 Representative pedigree analysis of (a) Autosomal dominant trait (for example:
Myotonic dystrophy) (b) Autosomal recessive trait (for example: Sickle-cell anaemia)

Colour Blidness : It is a sex-linked recessive disorder due to defect in
either red or green cone of eye resulting in failure to discriminate between
red and green colour. This defect is due to mutation in certain genes
present in the X chromosome. It occurs in about 8 per cent of males and
only about 0.4 per cent of females. This is because the genes that lead to
red-green colour blindness are on the X chromosome. Males have only
one X chromosome and females have two. The son of a woman who carries

2019-2020