CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION

 

Cells at the end of prophase, when viewed under the
microscope, do not show golgi complexes, endoplasmic
reticulum, nucleolus and the nuclear envelope.

10.2.2 Metaphase

The complete disintegration of the nuclear envelope marks
the start of the second phase of mitosis, hence the
chromosomes are spread through the cytoplasm of the cell.
By this stage, condensation of chromosomes is completed
and they can be observed clearly under the microscope. This
then, is the stage at which morphology of chromosomes is
most easily studied. At this stage, metaphase chromosome
is made up of two sister chromatids, which are held together
by the centromere (Figure 10.2 b). Small disc-shaped
structures at the surface of the centromeres are called
kinetochores. These structures serve as the sites of attachment
of spindle fibres (formed by the spindle ﬁbres) to the
chromosomes that are moved into position at the centre of
the cell. Hence, the metaphase is characterised by all the
chromosomes coming to lie at the equator with one chromatid
of each chromosome connected by its kinetochore to spindle
ﬁbres from one pole and its sister chromatid connected by
its kinetochore to spindle ﬁbres from the opposite pole (Figure
10.2 b). The plane of alignment of the chromosomes at
metaphase is referred to as the metaphase plate. The key
features of metaphase are:

0 Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of
chromosomes.

0 Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get
aligned along metaphase plate through spindle ﬁbres
to both poles.

10.2.3 Anaphase

At the onset of anaphase, each chromosome arranged at the
metaphase plate is split simultaneously and the two daughter
chromatids, now referred to as daughter chromosomes of
the future daughter nuclei, begin their migration towards
the two opposite poles. As each chromosome moves away
ﬁom the equatorial plate, the centromere of each chromosome
remains directed towards the pole and hence at the leading
edge, with the arms of the chromosome trailing behind
(Figure 10.2 0). Thus, anaphase stage is characterised by

 

Early Prophase

 

Transition to
Metaphase

 

Metaphase
(b)

Figure 10.2 a and b : A diagrammatic
View of stages in mitosis