EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

in the medullary interstitium. Presence of such interstitial gradient helps
in an easy passage of water from the collecting tubule thereby
concentrating the ﬁltrate (urine). Human kidneys can produce urine nearly
four times concentrated than the initial ﬁltrate formed.

19.5 REGULATION OF KIDNEY FUNCTION

The functioning of the kidneys is efﬁciently monitored and regulated by
hormonal feedback mechanisms involving the hypothalamus, J GA and
to a certain extent, the heart.

Osmoreceptors in the body are activated by changes in blood volume,
body ﬂuid volume and ionic concentration. An excessive loss of ﬂuid from
the body can activate these receptors which stimulate the hypothalamus
to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin from the
neurohypophysis. ADH facilitates water reabsorption from latter parts of
the tubule, thereby preventing diuresis. An increase in body ﬂuid volume
can switch off the osmoreceptors and suppress the ADH release to complete
the feedback. ADH can also affect the kidney function by its constrictory
effects on blood vessels. This causes an increase in blood pressure. An
increase in blood pressure can increase the glomerular blood ﬂow and
thereby the GFR.

The J GA plays a complex regulatory role. A fall in glomerular blood
ﬂow/glomerular blood pressure / GFR can activate the JG cells to release
renin which converts angiotensinogen in blood to angiotensin I and
further to angiotensin II. Angiotensin 11, being a powerful
vasoconstrictor, increases the glomerular blood pressure and thereby
GFR. Angiotensin II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
Aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na’“ and water from
the distal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood
pressure and GFR. This complex mechanism is generally known as
the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism.

An increase in blood ﬂow to the atria of the heart can cause the release
of Atrial Natriuretic Factor (AN F). AN F can cause vasodilation (dilation of
blood vessels) and thereby decrease the blood pressure. AN F mechanism,
therefore, acts as a check on the renin-angiotensin mechanism.

19.6 MICTURITION

Urine formed by the nephrons is ultimately carried to the urinary bladder
where it is stored till a voluntary signal is given by the central nervous
system (CNS). This signal is initiated by the stretching of the urinary bladder
as it gets ﬁlled with urine. In response, the stretch receptors on the walls
of the bladder send signals to the CNS. ’Ihe CNS passes on motor messages