MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

would be favoured energetically. The

presence of a catalyst would enhance 7
the rate of peptide bond formation. Growing polypeptide chain E
The cellular factory responsible for
synthesising proteins is the ribosome.
The ribosome consists of structural
RNAs and about 80 different proteins.
In its inactive state, it exists as two
subunits; a large subunit and a small
subunit. When the small subunit
encounters an mRNA, the process of C U C U U G
translation of the mRNA to protein 5'
begins. There are two sites in the large
subunit, for subsequent amino acids
to bind to and thus, be close enough Figure 6'13 TranSIation
to each other for the formation of a
peptide bond. The ribosome also acts as a catalyst (23S rRNA in bacteria
is the enzyme- ribozyme) for the formation of peptide bond.
A translational unit in mRNA is the sequence of RNA that is ﬂanked
by the start codon (AUG) and the stop codon and codes for a polypeptide.
An mRNA also has some additional sequences that are not translated
and are referred as untranslated regions (UTR). The UTRs are present
at both 5'-end (before start codon) and at 3'-end (after stop codon). They
are required for efficient translation process.
For initiation, the ribosome binds to the mRNA at the start codon (AUG)
that is recognised only by the initiator tRNA. The ribosome proceeds to the
elongation phase of protein synthesis. During this stage, complexes
composed of an amino acid linked to tRNA, sequentially bind to the
appropriate codon in mRNA by forming complementary base pairs with
the tRNA anticodon. The ribosome moves from codon to codon along the
mRNA. Amino acids are added one by one, translated into Polypeptide
sequences dictated by DNA and represented by mRNA At the end, a release
factor binds to the stop codon, terminating translation and releasing the
complete polypeptide from the ribosome.

 

6.8 REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION

Regulation of gene expression refers to a very broad term that may occur
at various levels. Considering that gene expression results in the formation
of a polypeptide, it can be regulated at several levels. In eukaryotes, the _
regulation could be exerted at —
(i) transcriptional level (formation of primary transcript),
(ii) processing level (regulation of splicing),

(iii) transport of mRNA from nucleus to the cytoplasm,
(iv) translational level.

2019—2020