284

 

BIOLOGY

pulmonary artery and the aorta respectively are provided with the
semilunar valves. The valves in the heart allows the ﬂow of blood only in
one direction, i.e., from the atria to the ventricles and from the ventricles
to the pulmonary artery or aorta. These valves prevent any backward
ﬂow.

The entire heart is made of cardiac muscles. The walls of ventricles
are much thicker than that of the atria. A specialised cardiac musculature
called the nodal tissue is also distributed in the heart (Figure 18.2). A
patch of this tissue is present in the right upper corner of the right atrium
called the sino—atrial node (SAN). Another mass of this tissue is seen in
the lower left corner of the right atrium close to the atrio—ventricular septum
called the atria-ventricular node (AVN). A bundle of nodal ﬁbres, atrio-
ventricular bundle (AV bundle) continues from the AVN which passes
through the atrio-ventricular septa to emerge on the top of the inter-
ventricular septum and immediately divides into a right and left bundle.
These branches give rise to minute ﬁbres throughout the ventricular
musculature of the respective sides and are called purkinje ﬁbres. The
nodal musculature has the ability to generate action potentials without
any external stimuli, i.e., it is autoexcitable. However, the number of action
potentials that could be generated in a minute vary at different parts of
the nodal system. The SAN can generate the maximum number of action
potentials, i.e., 7 0-7 5 min—1, and is responsible for initiating and
maintaining the rhythmic contractile activity of the heart. Therefore, it is
called the pacemaker. Our heart normally beats 7 O- 75 times in a minute
(average 72 beats min—1).

18.3.2 Cardiac Cycle

How does the heart function? Let us take a look. To begin with, all the
four chambers of heart are in a relaxed state, i.e., they are in joint
diastole. As the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are open, blood from the
pulmonary veins and vena cava ﬂows into the left and the right ventricle
respectively through the left and right atria. The semilunar valves are
closed at this stage. The SAN now generates an action potential which
stimulates both the atria to undergo a simultaneous contraction — the
atrial systole. This increases the ﬂow of blood into the ventricles by about
30 per cent. The action potential is conducted to the ventricular side by
the AVN and AV bundle from where the bundle of His transmits it through
the entire ventricular musculature. This causes the ventricular muscles
to contract, (ventricular systole), the atria undergoes relaxation
(diastole), coinciding with the ventricular systole. Ventricular systole
increases the ventricular pressure causing the closure of tricuspid and