PLANT KINGDOM

Bryophytes are also called amphibians of the plant kingdom because
these plants can live in soil but are dependent on water for sexual
reproduction. They usually occur in damp, humid and shaded localities.
They play an important role in plant succession on bare rocks / soil.

The plant body of bryophytes is more differentiated than that of algae.
It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect, and attached to the substratum
by unicellular or multicellular rhizoids. They lack true roots, stem or
leaves. They may possess root-like, leaf-like or stem-like structures. The
main plant body of the bryophyte is haploid. It produces gametes, hence
is called a gametophyte. The sex organs in bryophytes are multicellular.
The male sex organ is called antheridium. They produce biﬂagellate
antherozoids. The female sex organ called archegonium is ﬂask-shaped
and produces a single egg. The antherozoids are released into water where
they come in contact with archegonium. An antherozoid fuses with the
egg to produce the zygote. Zygotes do not undergo reduction division
immediately. They produce a multicellular body called a sporophyte.
The sporophyte is not free-living but attached to the photosynthetic
gametophyte and derives nourishment from it. Some cells of the
sporophyte undergo reduction division (meiosis) to produce haploid
spores. These spores germinate to produce gametophyte.

Bryophytes in general are of little economic importance but some
mosses provide food for herbaceous mammals, birds and other animals.
Species of Sphagnum a moss, provide peat that have long been used as
fuel, and as packing material for trans-shipment of living material because
of their capacity to hold water. Mosses along with lichens are the ﬁrst
organisms to colonise rocks and hence, are of great ecological importance.
They decompose rocks making the substrate suitable for the growth of
higher plants. Since mosses form dense mats on the soil, they reduce the
impact of falling rain and prevent soil erosion. The bryophytes are divided
into liverworts and mosses.

3.2. 1 Liverworts

The liverworts grow usually in moist, shady habitats such as banks of
streams, marshy ground, damp soil, bark of trees and deep in the woods.
The plant body of a liverwort is thalloid, e. g., Marchantia. The thallus is
dorsiventral and closely appressed to the substrate. The leafy members
have tiny leaf-like appendages in two rows on the stem-like structures.
Asexual reproduction in liverworts takes place by fragmentation of
thalli, or by the formation of specialised structures called gemmae
(sing. gemma). Gemmae are green, multicellular, asexual buds, which
develop in small receptacles called gemma cups located on the thalli.
The gemmae become detached from the parent body and germinate to
form new individuals. During sexual reproduction, male and female sex

35