Species richness —>

Figure 15.2 Showing species area relationship.

Note that on log scale the relationship
becomes linear regardless of the taxonomic group or the

 

 

BIOLOGY

evolutionary time for species diversiﬁcation, (b) Tropical environments,
unlike temperate ones, are less seasonal, relatively more constant
and predictable. Such constant environments promote niche
specialisation and lead to a greater species diversity and (c) There
is more solar energy available in the tropics, which contributes to
higher productivity; this in turn might contribute indirectly to greater
diversity.

(ii) Species-Area relationships: During his pioneering and extensive
explorations in the wilderness of South American jungles, the great
German naturalist and geographer Alexander von Humboldt

observed that within a region species

richness increased with increasing
explored area, but only up to a limit. In
fact, the relation between species richness
and area for a wide variety of taxa

(angiosperm plants, birds, bats,

freshwater fishes) turns out to be a

rectangular hyperbola (Figure 1 5.2). On

a logarithmic scale, the relationship is a

straight line described by the equation

logS = logC + ZlogA
where
S= Species richness A= Area

Area—> Z = slope of the line (regression

coefﬁcient)
C = Y—intercept
Ecologists have discovered that the
value of Z lies in the range of 0. 1 to 0.2,

region (whether it is the plants in Britain,
birds in California or molluscs in New York state, the slopes of the regression
line are amazingly similar). But, if you analyse the species-area
relationships among very large areas like the entire continents, you will
find that the slope of the line to be much steeper (Z values in the range
of 0.6 to 1.2). For example, for frugivorous (fruit-eating) birds and
mammals in the tropical forests of different continents, the slope is found
to be 1.15. What do steeper slopes mean in this context?

15. 1 .3 The importance of Species Diversity to the Ecosystem

Does the number of species in a community really matter to the functioning
of the ecosystem?l‘his is a question for which ecologists have not been
able to give a deﬁnitive answer. For many decades, ecologists believed
that communities with more species, generally, tend to be more stable
than those with less species. What exactly is stability for a biological

2019—2020