CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION

 

10.3 Signiﬁcance of Mitosis

Mitosis or the equational division is usually restricted to the diploid cells
only. However, in some lower plants and in some social insects haploid
cells also divide by mitosis. It is very essential to understand the
signiﬁcance of this division in the life of an organism. Are you aware of
some examples where you have studied about haploid and diploid insects?

Mitosis usually results in the production of diploid daughter cells
with identical genetic complement. The growth of multicellular organisms
is due to mitosis. Cell growth results in disturbing the ratio between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. It therefore becomes essential for the cell to
divide to restore the nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio. A very significant
contribution of mitosis is cell repair. The cells of the upper layer of the
epidermis, cells of the lining of the gut, and blood cells are being constantly
replaced. Mitotic divisions in the meristematic tissues — the apical and
the lateral cambium, result in a continuous growth of plants throughout
their life.

10.4 MEIOSIS

The production of offspring by sexual reproduction includes the fusion
of two gametes, each with a complete haploid set of chromosomes. Gametes
are formed from specialised diploid cells. This specialised kind of cell
division that reduces the chromosome number by half results in the
production of haploid daughter cells. This kind of division is called
meiosis. Meiosis ensures the production of haploid phase in the life cycle
of sexually reproducing organisms whereas fertilisation restores the diploid
phase. We come across meiosis during gametogenesis in plants and
animals. This leads to the formation of haploid gametes. The key features
of meiosis are as follows:

0 Meiosis involves two sequential cycles of nuclear and cell division called
meiosis I and meiosis II but only a single cycle of DNA replication.

0 Meiosis I is initiated after the parental chromosomes have replicated
to produce identical sister chromatids at the S phase.

0 Meiosis involves pairing of homologous chromosomes and
recombination between non-sister chromatids of homologous
chromosomes.

0 Four haploid cells are formed at the end of meiosis II.
Meiotic events can be grouped under the following phases: