BIOLOGY

There is a convention in deﬁning the two strands of the DNA in the
structural gene of a transcription unit. Since the two strands have opposite
polarity and the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase also catalyse the
polymerisation in only one direction, that is, 5'—>3', the strand that has
the polarity 3'—>5' acts as a template, and is also referred to as template
strand. The other strand which has the polarity (5'—>3') and the sequence
same as RNA (except thymine at the place of uracil), is displaced during
transcription. Strangely, this strand (which does not code for anything)
is referred to as coding strand. All the reference point while deﬁning a
transcription unit is made with coding strand. To explain the point, a
hypothetical sequence from a transcription unit is represented below:

3'-ATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGC-5' Template Strand
5'-TACGTACGTACGTACGTACGTACG-3' Coding Strand
Can you now write the sequence of RNA transcribed ﬁom the above DNA?

Transcription start site

Promoter Terminator

Structural gene Template strand

Coding strand

 

Figure 6.9 Schematic structure of a transcription unit

The promoter and terminator ﬂank the structural gene in a
transcription unit. The promoter is said to be located towards 5'-end
(upstream) of the structural gene (the reference is made with respect to
the polarity of coding strand). It is a DNA sequence that provides binding
site for RNA polymerase, and it is the presence of a promoter in a
transcription unit that also deﬁnes the template and coding strands. By
switching its position with terminator, the deﬁnition of coding and template
strands could be reversed. The terminator is located towards 3'-end
(downstream) of the coding strand and it usually deﬁnes the end of the
process of transcription (Figure 6.9). There are additional regulatory
sequences that may be present further upstream or downstream to the
promoter. Some of the properties of these sequences shall be discussed
while dealing with regulation of gene expression.

6.5.2 Transcription Unit and the Gene

A gene is deﬁned as the functional unit of inheritance. Though there is no
ambiguity that the genes are located on the DNA, it is difﬁcult to literally

2019—2020