STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

7. 1 . 1 Epithelial Tissue

We commonly refer to an epithelial tissue as epithelium (pl.: epithelia).
This tissue has a free surface, which faces either a body ﬂuid or the outside
environment and thus provides a covering or a lining for some part of the
body. The cells are compactly packed with little intercellular matrix. There
are two types of epithelial tissues namely simple epithelium and
compound epithelium. Simple epithelium is composed of a single layer
of cells and functions as a lining for body cavities, ducts, and tubes. The
compound epithelium consists of two or more cell layers and has protective
function as it does in our skin.

On the basis of structural modiﬁcation of the cells, simple epithelium
is further divided into three types. These are (i) Squamous, (ii) Cuboidal,
(iii) Columnar (Figure 7 . 1).

 

Figure 7.1 Simple epithelium: (a) Squamous (b) Cuboidal (c) Columnar
(d) Columnar cells bearing cilia

The squamous epithelium is made of a single thin layer of ﬂattened
cells with irregular boundaries. They are found in the walls of blood vessels
and air sacs of lungs and are involved in functions like forming a diffusion
boundary. The cuboidal epithelium is composed of a single layer of
cube-like cells. This is commonly found in ducts of glands and tubular
parts of nephrons in kidneys and its main functions are secretion and
absorption. The epithelium of proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) of
nephron in the kidney has microvilli. The columnar epithelium is
composed of a single layer of tall and slender cells. Their nuclei are located
at the base. Free surface may have microvilli. They are found in the lining
of stomach and intestine and help in secretion and absorption. If the
columnar or cuboidal cells bear cilia on their free surface they are called
ciliated epithelium (Figure 7 . 1d). Their function is to move particles or
mucus in a speciﬁc direction over the epithelium. They are mainly present
in the inner surface of hollow organs like bronchioles and fallopian tubes.

101