CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INrEGRATION

335

baby leading to stunted growth (cretinism), mental retardation, low
intelligence quotient, abnormal skin, deaf-mutism, etc. In adult women,
hypothyroidism may cause menstrual cycle to become irregular. Due to
cancer of the thyroid gland or due to development of nodules of the thyroid
glands, the rate of synthesis and secretion of the thyroid hormones is
increased to abnormal high levels leading to a condition called
hyperthyroidism which adversely affects the body physiology.
Exopthalmic goitre is a form of hyperthyroidism, characterised by
enlargement of the thyroid gland, protrusion of the eyeballs, increased
basal metabolic rate, and weight loss, also called Graves’ disease.
Thyroid hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal
metabolic rate. These hormones also support the process of red blood cell
formation. Thyroid hormones control the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins
and fats. Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is also inﬂuenced by
thyroid hormones. Thyroid gland also secretes a protein hormone called
thyrocalcitonin (TCT) which regulates the blood calcium levels.

22.2.5 Parathyroid Gland

In humans, four parathyroid glands are present on the back side of the
thyroid gland, one pair each in the two lobes of the thyroid gland (Figure
22.3b). The parathyroid glands secrete a peptide hormone called
parathyroid hormone (PTH). The secretion of PTH is regulated by the
circulating levels of calcium ions.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases the Ca2+ levels in the blood. PTH
acts on bones and stimulates the process of bone resorption (dissolution/
demineralisation). PTH also stimulates reabsorption of Ca2+ by the renal
tubules and increases Ca2+ absorption from the digested food. It is, thus,
clear that PI‘H is a hypercalcemic hormone, i.e., it increases the blood

Ca2+ levels. Along with TCT, it plays a signiﬁcant role in calcium balance
in the body.

22.2.6 Thymus

The thymus gland is a lobular structure located between lungs behind
sternum on the ventral side of aorta. The thymus plays a major role in
the development of the immune system. This gland secretes the peptide
hormones called thymosins. Thymosins play a major role in the
differentiation of T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated
immunity. In addition, thymosins also promote production of antibodies
to provide humoral immunity. Thymus is degenerated in old individuals
resulting in a decreased production of thymosins. As a result, the immune
responses of old persons become weak.