192

 

BIOLOGY

as complex carbohydrates. The loss of solute produces a high water
potential in the phloem, and water passes out, returning eventually to xylem.

A simple experiment, called girdling, was used to identify the tissues
through which food is transported. On the trunk of a tree a ring of bark
up to a depth of the phloem layer, can be carefully removed. In the absence
of downward movement of food the portion of the bark above the ring on
the stem becomes swollen after a few weeks. This simple experiment
shows that phloem is the tissue responsible for translocation of food; and
that transport takes place in one direction, i.e., towards the roots. This
experiment can be performed by you easily.

SUMMARY

Plants obtain a variety of inorganic elements (ions) and salts from their
surroundings especially from water and soil. The movement of these nutrients
from environment into the plant as well as from one plant cell to another plant cell
essentially involves movement across a cell membrane. Transport across cell
membrane can be through diffusion, facilitated transport or active transport. Water
and minerals absorbed by roots are transported by xylem and the organic material
synthesised in the leaves 1s transported to other parts of plant through phloem.

Passive transport (diffusr, Vosmos1s) and.act1ve transport are the two modes
’ "n" living organisms. In passive

of nutrient transport across: gel , in,
transport, nutrients move aeross the me “ :agne by diffusion, without any use of

      
 

 

,w.

This diffusion of slibstances depends on their size, solubility 1n water or organic
solvents. Osmosis; the special ype of diffusion of water across a selectively
permeable membrane whrchidepends on pressure gradient and concentration
gradient. In active transport energy in the form of ATP is utilised to pump
molecules against a concentration gradient across membranes. Water potential 1s
the potential energi ofwatEr molecules which helps 1n the movement of water It' 1s
determined by solute p‘oLential and pressure potential. The osmotic behaviour of
cells depends on the surrounding solution. If the surrounding solution of the cell
is hypertonic, it gets plasmolysed. The absorption of water by seeds and drywood
takes place by a special type of diffusion called imbibition.

In higher plants, there is a vascular system comprising of xylem and phloem,
responsible for translocation. Water minerals and food cannot be moved within
the body of a plant by diffusion alone. They are therefore, transported by a mass
ﬂow system — movement of substance in bulk from one point to another as a
result of pressure differences between the two points.

Water absorbed by root hairs moves into the root tissue by two distinct
pathways, i.e., apoplast and symplast. Various ions, and water from soil can be
transported upto a small height in stems by root pressure. Transpiration pull
model is the most acceptable to explain the transport of water. Transpiration is