BIOLOGY

6.9 HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

In the preceding sections you have learnt that it is the sequence of bases in
DNA that determines the genetic information of a given organism. In other
words, genetic make-up of an organism or an individual lies in the DNA
sequences. If two individuals differ, then their DNA sequences should also
be different, at least at some places. These assumptions led to the quest of
ﬁnding out the complete DNA sequence of human genome. With the
establishment of genetic engineering techniques where it was possible to
isolate and clone any piece of DNA and availability of simple and fast
techniques for determining DNA sequences, a very ambitious project of
sequencing human genome was launched in the year 1990.

Human Genome Project (HGP) was called a mega project. You can
imagine the magnitude and the requirements for the project if we simply
deﬁne the aims of the project as follows:

Human genome is said to have approm’mately 3 X 109 bp, and if the
cost of sequencing required is US $ 3 per bp (the estimated cost in the
beginning), the total estimated cost of the project would be approximately
9 billion US dollars. Further, if the obtained sequences were to be stored
in typed form in books, and if each page of the book contained 1000
letters and each book contained 1000 pages, then 3300 such books would
be required to store the information of DNA sequence from a single human
cell. The enormous amount of data expected to be generated also
necessitated the use of high speed computational devices for data storage
and retrieval, and analysis. HGP was closely associated with the rapid
development of a new area in biology called Bioinformatics.

Goals of HGP
Some of the important goals of HGP were as follows:

(i) Identify all the approximately 20,000-25,000 genes in human DNA;

(ii) Determine the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs that
make up human DNA;

(iiii) Store this information in databases;

(iv) Improve tools for data analysis;

(v) Transfer related technologies to other sectors, such as industries;

(vi) Address the ethical, legal, and social issues (ELSI) that may arise

from the project.

The Human Genome Project was a 13-year project coordinated by
the US. Department of Energy and the National Institute of Health. During
the early years of the HGP, the Wellcome Trust (U.K.) became a major
partner; additional contributions came from Japan, France, Germany,
China and others. The project was completed in 2003. Knowledge about

the effects of DNA variations among individuals can lead to revolutionary
new ways to diagnose, treat and someday prevent the thousands of

2019—2020