HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE

8.2.5 Allergies

When you have gone to a new place and suddenly you started sneezing,
wheezing for no explained reason, and when you went away, your
symptoms dissappeared. Did this happen to you? Some of us are sensitive
to some particles in the environment. The above-mentioned reaction could
be because of allergy to pollen, mites, etc., which are different in different
places.

The exaggerated response of the immune system to certain antigens
present in the environment is called allergy. The substances to which
such an immune response is produced are called allergens. The antibodies
produced to these are of IgE type. Common examples of allergens are
mites in dust, pollens, animal dander, etc. Symptoms of allergic reactions
include sneezing, watery eyes, running nose and difﬁculty in breathing.
Allergy is due to the release of chemicals like histamine and serotonin
from the mast cells. For determining the cause of allergy, the patient is
exposed to or injected with very small doses of possible allergens, and the
reactions studied. The use of drugs like anti-histamine, adrenalin and
steroids quickly reduce the symptoms of allergy. Somehow, modern-day
life style has resulted in lowering of immunity and more sensitivity to
allergens — more and more children in metro cities of India suffer from
allergies and asthma due to sensitivity to the environment. This could be
because of the protected environment provided early in life.

8.2.6 Auto Immunity

Memory-based acquired immunity evolved in higher vertebrates based
on the ability to differentiate foreign organisms (e. g., pathogens) from self-
cells. While we still do not understand the basis of this, two corollaries of
this ability have to be understood. One, higher vertebrates can distinguish
foreign molecules as well as foreign organisms. Most of the experimental
immunology deals with this aspect. Two, sometimes, due to genetic and
other unknown reasons, the body attacks self-cells. This results in damage
to the body and is called auto-immune disease. Rheumatoid arthritis
which affects many people in our society is an auto-immune disease.

8.2.7 Immune System in the Body

The human immune system consists of lymphoid organs, tissues, cells
and soluble molecules like antibodies. As you have read, immune system
is unique in the sense that it recognises foreign antigens, responds to
these and remembers them. The immune system also plays an important
role in allergic reactions, auto-immune diseases and organ
transplantation.

Lymphoid organs: These are the organs where origin and / or maturation
and proliferation of lymphocytes occur. The primary lymphoid organs
are bone marrow and thymus where immature lymphocytes differentiate

2019—2020

153