MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

injected a mixture of heat-killed S and live R bacteria, the mice died.
Moreover, he recovered living S bacteria from the dead mice.

He concluded that the R strain bacteria had somehow been
transformed by the heat-killed S strain bacteria. Some ‘transforming
principle’, transferred from the heat-killed S strain, had enabled the
R strain to synthesise a smooth polysaccharide coat and become virulent.
This must be due to the transfer of the genetic material. However, the
biochemical nature of genetic material was not defined from his
experiments.

Biochemical Characterisation of Transforming Principle

Prior to the work of Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty
(1933-44), the genetic material was thought to be a protein. They worked
to determine the biochemical nature of ‘transforming principle’ in Griffith's
experiment.

They puriﬁed biochemicals (proteins, DNA, RNA, etc.) from the
heat-killed S cells to see which ones could transform live R cells into
S cells. They discovered that DNA alone from S bacteria caused R bacteria
to become transformed.

They also discovered that protein-digesting enzymes (proteases) and
RNA-digesting enzymes (RNases) did not affect transformation, so the
transforming substance was not a protein or RNA. Digestion with DNase
did inhibit transformation, suggesting that the DNA caused the
transformation. They concluded that DNA is the hereditary material, but
not all biologists were convinced.

Can you think of any difference between DNAs and DNase?

6.2. 1 The Genetic Material is DNA

The unequivocal proof that DNA is the genetic material came from the
experiments of Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase (1952). They worked
with Viruses that infect bacteria called bacteriophages.

The bacteriophage attaches to the bacteria and its genetic material
then enters the bacterial cell. The bacterial cell treats the viral genetic
material as if it was its own and subsequently manufactures more virus
particles. Hershey and Chase worked to discover whether it was protein
or DNA from the viruses that entered the bacteria.

They grew some viruses on a medium that contained radioactive
phosphorus and some others on medium that contained radioactive sulfur.
Viruses grown in the presence of radioactive phosphorus contained
radioactive DNA but not radioactive protein because DNA contains
phosphorus but protein does not. Similarly, viruses grown on radioactive
sulfur contained radioactive protein but not radioactive DNA because
DNA does not contain sulfur.

2019—2020