210

Absorbance of light by
chloroplast pigments

’8

Rate of photosynthesis
" (measured by 02 release)

Light absorbed

400

Chlorophyll b

Carotenoids

 

— Rate of photosynthesis
— Absorption

 

50%;?- évé’ 700

(C) Wavelength of 11?th in nanometres (nm)

Figure 13.3a Graph showing the absorption

Figure 13.3b

Figure 13.3c

spectrum of chlorophyll a, b and
the carotenoids

Graph showing action
spectrum of photosynthesis
Graph showing action

spectrum of photosynthesis
superimposed on absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll a

BIOLOGY

13.4 How MANY TYPES OF PIGMENTS ARE
INVOLVED IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS?

Looking at plants have you ever wondered why
and how there are so many shades of green in
their leaves — even in the same plant? We can
look for an answer to this question by trying to
separate the leaf pigments of any green plant
through paper chromatography. A
chromatographic separation of the leaf pigments
shows that the colour that we see in leaves is
not due to a single pigment but due to four
pigments: Chlorophyll a (bright or blue green
in the chromatogram), chlorophyll b [yellow
green), xanthophylls (yellow) and carotenoids
(yellow to yellow-orange). Let us now see what
roles various pigments play in photosynthesis.

Pigments are substances that have an ability
to absorb light, at speciﬁc wavelengths. Can you
guess which is the most abundant plant
pigment in the world? Let us study the graph
showing the ability of chlorophyll a pigment to
absorb lights of different wavelengths (Figure
13.3 a). Of course, you are familiar with the
wavelength of the visible spectrum of light as
well as the VIBGYOR.

From Figure 13.3a can you determine the
wavelength (colour of light) at which chlorophyll
a shows the maximum absorption? Does it
show another absorption peak at any other
wavelengths too? If yes, which one?

Now look at Figure 13.3b showing the
wavelengths at which maximum photosynthesis
occurs in a plant. Can you see that the
wavelengths at which there is maximum
absorption by chlorophyll a, i.e., in the blue and
the red regions, also shows higher rate of
photosynthesis. Hence, we can conclude that
chlorophyll a is the chief pigment associated
with photosynthesis. But by looking at Figure
13.3c can you say that there is a complete
one-to-one overlap between the absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll a and the action
spectrum of photosynthesis?