CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION

ovarian follicles, appearance of female secondary sex characters (e. g., high
pitch of voice, etc.), mammary gland development. Estrogens also regulate
female sexual behaviour.

Progesterone supports pregnancy. Progesterone also acts on the
mammary glands and stimulates the formation of alveoli (sac-like
structures which store milk) and milk secretion.

22.3 HORMONES 0F HEART, KIDNEY AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT

Now you know about the endocrine glands and their hormones. However,
as mentioned earlier, hormones are also secreted by some tissues which
are not endocrine glands. For example, the atrial wall of our heart secretes
a very important peptide hormone called atrial natriuretic factor (AN F),
which decreases blood pressure. When blood pressure is increased, ANF
is secreted which causes dilation of the blood vessels. This reduces the
blood pressure.

The j uxtaglomerular cells of kidney produce a peptide hormone called
erythropoietin which stimulates erythropoiesis (formation of RBC).

Endocrine cells present in different parts of the gastro-intestinal tract
secrete four major peptide hormones, namely gastrin, secretin,
cholecystokinin (CCK) and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). Gastrin
acts on the gastric glands and stimulates the secretion of hydrochloric
acid and pepsinogen. Secretin acts on the exocrine pancreas and
stimulates secretion of water and bicarbonate ions. CCK acts on both
pancreas and gall bladder and stimulates the secretion of pancreatic
enzymes and bile juice, respectively. GIP inhibits gastric secretion and
motility. Several other non-endocrine tissues secrete hormones called
growth factors. These factors are essential for the normal growth of tissues
and their repairing/ regeneration.

22.4 MECHANISM OF HORMONE ACTION

Hormones produce their effects on target tissues by binding to specific
proteins called hormone receptors located in the target tissues only.
Hormone receptors present on the cell membrane of the target cells are
called membrane-bound receptors and the receptors present inside the
target cell are called intracellular receptors, mostly nuclear receptors
(present in the nucleus). Binding of a hormone to its receptor leads to the
formation of a hormone-receptor complex (Figure 22.5 a, b). Each
receptor is speciﬁc to one hormone only and hence receptors are speciﬁc.
Hormone-Receptor complex formation leads to certain biochemical
changes in the target tissue. Target tissue metabolism and hence

339