Normal Hb (A) gene

BIOLOGY

the gene has a 50 per cent chance of being colour blind. The mother is
not herself colour blind because the gene is recessive. That means that its
effect is suppressed by her matching dominant normal gene. A daughter
will not normally be colour blind, unless her mother is a carrier and her
father is colour blind.

Haemophilia : This sex linked recessive disease, which shows its
transmission from unaffected carrier female to some of the male progeny
has been widely studied. In this disease, a single protein that is a part of
the cascade of proteins involved in the clotting of blood is affected. Due to
this, in an affected individual a simple cut will result in non-stop bleeding.
The heterozygous female (carrier) for haemophilia may transmit the disease
to sons. The possibility of a female becoming a haemophilic is extremely
rare because mother of such a female has to be at least carrier and the
father should be haemophilic (unviable in the later stage of life). The family
pedigree of Queen Victoria shows a number of haemophilic descendents
as she was a carrier of the disease.

Sickle-cell anaemia : This is an autosome linked recessive trait that can
be transmitted from parents to the offspring when both the partners are
carrier for the gene (or heterozygous). The disease is controlled by a single
pair of allele, HbA and HbS. Out of the three possible genotypes only
homozygous individuals for HbS (HbsHbS) show the diseased phenotype.
Heterozygous (HbAHbS) individuals appear apparently unaffected but they
are carrier of the disease as there is 50 per cent probability of transmission
of the mutant gene to the progeny, thus exhibiting sickle-cell trait
(Figure 5.15). The defect is caused by the substitution of Glutamic acid

 

---GTG---

"GAG'"
.. ---CAC---

--CTC ‘ Sickle-cell Hb(S) gene

 

34567 234567
HbA peptide HbS peptide

Figure 5.15 Micrograph of the red blood cells and the amino acid composition of the relevant
portion of [3-chain of haemoglobin: (a) From a normal individual; (b) From an individual
with sickle-cell anaemia

2019-2020