W

2)

 

Character Dominant trait Recessive trait

Seed shape

Seed colour

Flower colour

Pod shape

Pod colour

Flower
position

 

Round Wrinkled
Yellow Green
Violet White
Full Constricted

 

 

Tall Dwarf

Figure 5.1 Seven pairs of contrasting traits in
pea plant studied by Mendel

 

BIOLOGY

wild cows, we have well-known Indian
breeds, e.g., Sahiwal cows in Punjab. We
must, however, recognise that though our
ancestors knew about the inheritance of
characters and variation, they had very
little idea about the scientiﬁc basis of these
phenomena.

5. 1 MENDEL’S LAWS OF INHERITANCE

It was during the mid-nineteenth century that
headway was made in the understanding of
inheritance. Gregor Mendel, conducted
hybridisation experiments on garden peas for
seven years (1856- 1863) and proposed the
laws of inheritance in living organisms. During
Mendel’s investigations into inheritance
patterns it was for the ﬁrst time that statistical
analysis and mathematical logic were applied
to problems in biology. His experiments had a
large sampling size, which gave greater
credibility to the data that he collected. Also,
the confirmation of his inferences from
experiments on successive generations of his
test plants, proved that his results pointed to
general rules of inheritance rather than being
unsubstantiated ideas. Mendel investigated
characters in the garden pea plant that were
manifested as two opposing traits, e.g., tall or
dwarf plants, yellow or green seeds. This
allowed him to set up a basic framework of
rules governing inheritance, which was
expanded on by later scientists to account for
all the diverse natural observations and the
complexity inherent in them.

Mendel conducted such artificial
pollination / cross pollination experiments
using several true-breeding pea lines. A true-
breeding line is one that, having undergone

continuous self-pollination, shows the stable trait inheritance and
expression for several generations. Mendel selected 14 true-breeding pea
plant varieties, as pairs which were similar except for one character with
contrasting traits. Some of the contrasting traits selected were smooth or
wrinkled seeds, yellow or green seeds, inﬂated (full) or constricted green
or yellow pods and tall or dwarf plants (Figure 5.1, Table 5.1).

2019—2020