9.1

9.2

9. 3
9.4
9.5
9. 6
9. 7

9. 8

9. 9

l I 080CH09

How to Analyse
Chemical
Composition?

Primary and

Secondary
Metabolites

Biomacromoleci tles
Proteins
Polysaccharides
Nucleic Acids

Structure of
Proteins

Nature ofBond
Linking Monomers
in a Polymer

Dynamic State of
Body Constituents
7 Concept of
Metabolism

9.10 Metabolic Basisfor

Living

9.1 l The Living State

9.12 Enzymes

C HAPTER 9

BIOMOLECULES

There is a wide diversity in living organisms in our biosphere. Now a
question that arises in our minds is: Are all living organisms made of the
same chemicals, i.e., elements and compounds? You have learnt in
chemistry how elemental analysis is performed. If we perform such an
analysis on a plant tissue, animal tissue or a microbial paste, we obtain a
list of elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and several others and
their respective content per unit mass of a living tissue. If the same analysis
is performed on a piece of earth’s crust as an example of non-living matter,
we obtain a similar list. What are the differences between the two lists? In
absolute terms, no such differences could be made out. All the elements
present in a sample of earth’s crust are also present in a sample of living
tissue. However, a closer examination reveals that the relative abundance
of carbon and hydrogen with respect to other elements is higher in any
living organism than in earth’s crust (Table 9.1).

9.1 How TO ANALYSE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION?

We can continue asking in the same way, what type of organic compounds
are found in living organisms? How does one go about finding the answer?
To get an answer, one has to perform a chemical analysis. We can take any
living tissue (a vegetable or a piece of liver, etc.) and grind it in trichloroacetic
acid (C13CCOOH) using a mortar and a pestle. We obtain a thick slurry. If
we were to strain this through a cheesecloth or cotton we would Obtain two
fractions. One is called the filtrate or more technically, the acid-soluble
pool, and the second, the retentate or the acid-insoluble fraction. Scientists
have found thousands of organic compounds in the acid-soluble pool.

2019-2020