PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

communication was not easy (as it is now) in those days and his work
could not be widely publicised. Secondly, his concept of genes (or
factors, in Mendel’s words) as stable and discrete units that controlled
the expression of traits and, of the pair of alleles which did not ‘blend’
with each other, was not accepted by his contemporaries as an
explanation for the apparently continuous variation seen in nature.
Thirdly, Mendel’s approach of using mathematics to explain biological
phenomena was totally new and unacceptable to many of the
biologists of his time. Finally, though Mendel’s work suggested that
factors (genes) were discrete units, he could not provide any physical
proof for the existence of factors or say what they were made of.

In 1900, three Scientists (de Vries, Correns and von Tschermak)
independently rediscovered Mendel’s results on the inheritance of
characters. Also, by this time due to advancements in microscopy that
were taking place, scientists were able to carefully observe cell division.
This led to the discovery of structures in the nucleus that appeared to
double and divide just before each cell division. These were called
chromosomes (colored bodies, as they were visualised by staining). By
1902, the chromosome movement during meiosis had been worked out.
Walter Sutton and Theodore Boveri noted that the behaviour of
chromosomes was parallel to the behaviour of genes and used
chromosome movement (Figure 5.8) to explain Mendel’s laws (Table 5.3).
Recall that you have studied the behaviour of chromosomes during mitosis
(equational division) and during meiosis (reduction division). The
important things to remember are that chromosomes as well as genes
occur in pairs. The two alleles of a gene pair are located on homologous
sites on homologous chromosomes.

G1 G2 Meiosis I Meiosis II Germ cells
anaphase

Figure 5.8 Meiosis and germ cell formation in a cell with four chromosomes.
Can you see how chromosomes segregate when germ cells
are formed?

2019-2020