166

 

(d)

 

 

Interphase
(e)

Figure 10.2 c to e : A diagrammatic
View of stages in Mitosis

BIOLOGY

the following key events:
0 Centromeres split and chromatids separate.

0 Chromatids move to opposite poles.

10.2.4 Telophase

At the beginning of the ﬁnal stage of karyokinesis, i.e.,
telophase, the chromosomes that have reached their
respective poles decondense and lose their individuality. The
individual chromosomes can no longer be seen and each set
of chromatin material tends to collect at each of the two poles
(Figure 10.2 d). This is the stage which shows the following
key events:

0 Chromosomes cluster at opposite spindle poles and their
identity is lost as discrete elements.

0 Nuclear envelope develops around the chromosome
clusters at each pole forming two daughter nuclei.

0 Nucleolus, golgi complex and ER reform.

10.2.5 Cytokinesis

Mitosis accomplishes not only the segregation of duplicated
chromosomes into daughter nuclei (karyokinesis), but the
cell itself is divided into two daughter cells by the separation
of cytoplasm called cytokinesis at the end of which cell
division gets completed (Figure 10.2 e). In an animal cell,
this is achieved by the appearance of a furrow in the plasma
membrane. The furrow gradually deepens and ultimately
joins in the centre dividing the cell cytoplasm into two. Plant
cells however, are enclosed by a relatively inextensible cell
wall, thererfore they undergo cytokinesis by a different
mechanism. In plant cells, wall formation starts in the centre
of the cell and grows outward to meet the existing lateral
walls. The formation of the new cell wall begins with the
formation of a simple precursor, called the cell-plate that
represents the middle lamella between the walls of two
adjacent cells. At the time of cytoplasmic division, organelles
like mitochondria and plastids get distributed between the
two daughter cells. In some organisms karyokinesis is not
followed by cytokinesis as a result of which multinucleate
condition arises leading to the formation of syncytium (e. g.,
liquid endosperm in coconut).