228

 

BIOLOGY

distance that gases must diffuse even in large, bulky plants is not great.
Each living cell in a plant is located quite close to the surface of the plant.
This is true for leaves’, you may ask, ‘but what about thick, woody stems
and roots?’ In stems, the ‘living’ cells are organised in thin layers inside
and beneath the bark. They also have openings called lenticels. The cells
in the interior are dead and provide only mechanical support. Thus, most
cells of a plant have at least a part of their surface in contact with air. This
is also facilitated by the loose packing of parenchyma cells in leaves, stems
and roots, which provide an interconnected network of air spaces.

The complete combustion of glucose, which produces CO2 and H20
as end products, yields energy most of which is given out as heat.

  

 

Gngg +. 1632: _—:‘>i meg lilaﬂér+JEnef

‘

If this energy is to be useful to the cell, it should be able to utilise it to
synthesise other molecules that the cell requires. The strategy that the
plant cell uses is to catabolise the glucose molecule in such a way that
not all the liberated energy goes out as heat. The key is to oxidise glucose
not in one step but in several small steps enabling some steps to be just
large enough such that the energy released can be coupled to ATP
synthesis. How this is done is, essentially, the story of respiration.

During the process of respiration, oxygen is utilised, and carbon
dioxide, water and energy are released as products. The combustion
reaction requires oxygen. But some cells live where oxygen may or may
not be available. Can you think of such situations (and organisms) where
02 is not available? There are sufﬁcient reasons to believe that the ﬁrst
cells on this planet lived in an atmosphere that lacked oxygen. Even
among present-day living organisms, we know of several that are adapted
to anaerobic conditions. Some of these organisms are facultative
anaerobes, while in others the requirement for anaerobic condition is
obligate. In any case, all living organisms retain the enzymatic machinery
to partially oxidise glucose without the help of oxygen. This breakdown
of glucose to pyruvic acid is called glycolysis.

14.2 GLYCOLYSIS

The term glycolysis has originated from the Greek words, glycos for sugar,
and lysis for splitting. The scheme of glycolysis was given by Gustav
Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and J. Parnas, and is often referred to as the
EMP pathway. In anaerobic organisms, it is the only process in respiration.
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell and is present in all living
organisms. In this process, glucose undergoes partial oxidation to form
two molecules of pyruvic acid. In plants, this glucose is derived from
sucrose, which is the end product of photosynthesis, or from storage