110

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  

Spermathecae

, _ ...... Testis sac
with testes

Spermiducal
fu mi 615

Seminal
vesicles

Ovary

Ovarian
funnel

Ovid uct

Vasa deterentia

Prostate Gland

Figure 7.13 Reproductive system of earthworm

Accessory glands

Common prostatic
and spermatic duct

BIOLOGY

Sensory system does not have eyes but does
possess light and touch sensitive organs (receptor
cells) to distinguish the light intensities and to feel
the vibrations in the ground. Worms have
specialised chemoreceptors (taste receptors) which
react to chemical stimuli. These sense organs are
located on the anterior part of the worm.

Earthworm is hermaphrodite (bisexual), i.e.,
testes and ovaries are present in the same
individual (Figure 7.13). There are two pairs of
testes present in the 10th and 1 1th segments.
Their vasa deferentia run up to the 1 8th segment
where they join the prostatic duct. Two pairs of
accessory glands are present one pair each in
the 1 7th and 19th segments. The common prostate
and spermatic duct (vasa deferentia) opens to
the exterior by a pair of male genital pores on
the ventro-lateral side of the 18th segment. Four
pairs of spermathecae are located in 631-9th
segments (one pair in each segment). They receive
and store spermatozoa during copulation. One
pair of ovaries is attached at the inter-segmental
septum of the 12th and 13th segments. Ovarian
funnels are present beneath the ovaries which
continue into oviduct, join together and open on
the ventral side as a single median female genital
pore on the 14th segment.

A mutual exchange of sperm occurs between
two worms during mating. One worm has to ﬁnd
another worm and they mate juxtaposing
opposite gonadal openings exchanging packets
of sperms called spermatophores. Mature sperm
and egg cells and nutritive ﬂuid are deposited in
cocoons produced by the gland cells of clitellum.
Fertilisation and development occur within the
cocoons which are deposited in soil. The ova
(eggs) are fertilised by the sperm cells within the
cocoon which then slips off the worm and is
deposited in or on the soil. The cocoon holds the
worm embryos. After about 3 weeks, each cocoon
produces two to twenty baby worms with an
average of four. Development of earthworms is
direct, i.e., there is no larva formed.

2019-2020