SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

endosperm tissue. The cells of this tissue are filled with
reserve food materials and are used for the nutrition of
the developing embryo. In the most common type of
endosperm development, the PEN undergoes successive
nuclear divisions to give rise to free nuclei. This stage of
endosperm development is called free-nuclear endosperm.
Subsequently cell wall formation occurs and the
endosperm becomes cellular. The number of free nuclei
formed before cellularisation varies greatly. The coconut
water from tender coconut that you are familiar with, is
nothing but free-nuclear endosperm (made up of
thousands of nuclei) and the surrounding white kernel is
the cellular endosperm.

Endosperm may either be completely consumed by the (a)
developing embryo (e.g., pea, groundnut, beans) before seed
maturation or it may persist in the mature seed (e.g. castor
and coconut) and be used up during seed germination. Split
open some seeds of castor, peas, beans, groundnut, fruit of
coconut and look for the endosperm in each case. Find out
whether the endosperm is persistent in cereals — wheat, rice
and maize.

Scutellum

:— 7 Coleoptile

   

2.4.2 Embryo Shoot apex

Embryo develops at the micropylar end of the embryo sac where
the zygote is situated. Most zygotes divide only after certain
amount of endosperm is formed. This is an adaptation to
provide assured nutrition to the developing embryo. Though
the seeds differ greatly, the early stages of embryo development
(embryogeny) are similar in both monocotyledons and
dicotyledons. Figure 2.13 depicts the stages of embryogeny in
a dicotyledonous embryo. The zygote gives rise to the
proembryo and subsequently to the globular, heart-shaped
and mature embryo.

A typical dicotyledonous embryo (Figure 2.14a), consists

Epiblast

(b)
of an embryonal axis and two cotyledons. The portion of Figure 2.14 (a) A typical dicot

embryonal axis above the level of cotyledons is the epicotyl, embryo; (b) L~S~ ofan

which terminates with the plumule or stem tip. The cylindrical embryo ofgtass

portion below the level of cotyledons is hypocotyl that

terminates at its lower end in the radicle or root tip. The root
tip is covered with a root cap.

Embryos of monocotyledons (Figure 2.14 b) possess only
one cotyledon. In the grass family the cotyledon is called
scutellum that is situated towards one side (lateral) of the
embryonal axis. At its lower end, the embryonal axis has the

2019-2020