BIOLOGY

applied to detect genes in individuals with inherited susceptibility to
certain cancers. Identiﬁcation of such genes, which predispose an
individual to certain cancers, may be very helpful in prevention of
cancers. Such individuals may be advised to avoid exposure to
particular carcinogens to which they are susceptible (e.g., tobacco
smoke in case of lung cancer).

Treatment of cancer : The common approaches for treatment of cancer
are surgery, radiation therapy and immunotherapy. In radiotherapy,
tumor cells are irradiated lethally, taking proper care of the normal tissues
surrounding the tumor mass. Several chemotherapeutic drugs are used
to kill cancerous cells. Some of these are speciﬁc for particular tumors.
Majority of drugs have side effects like hair loss, anemia, etc. Most cancers
are treated by combination of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Tumor cells have been shown to avoid detection and destruction by
immune system. Therefore, the patients are given substances called
biological response modifiers such as a—interferon which activates their
immune system and helps in destroying the tumor.

8.5 DRUGS AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

Surveys and statistics show that use of drugs and alcohol has been on
the rise especially among the youth. This is really a cause of concern as it
could result in many harmful effects. Proper education and guidance
would enable youth to safeguard themselves against these dangerous
behaviour patterns and follow healthy lifestyles.

The drugs, which are commonly abused are opioids, cannabinoids
and coca alkaloids. Majority of these are obtained from ﬂowering plants.
Some are obtained from fungi.

Opioids are the drugs, which bind to specific opioid receptors present
in our central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. Heroin
(Figure 8.7), commonly called smack is chemically diacetylmorphine which
is a white, odourless, bitter crystalline compound. This is obtained by
acetylation of morphine (Figure 8.7), which is extracted from the latex of

 

Figure 8.7 Chemical structure of Morphine Figure 8.8 Opium poppy

2019—2020