BIOLOGY

After getting into the body of the person, the virus enters into macrophages
where RNA genome of the virus replicates to form viral DNA with the help of
the enzyme reverse transcriptase. This viral DNA gets incorporated into host
cell’s DNA and directs the infected cells to produce virus particles (Figure 8.6).
The macrophages continue to produce virus and in this way acts like a HIV
factory. Simultaneously, HIV enters into helper
T—lymphocytes (TH), replicates and produce progeny viruses. The progeny
Viruses released in the blood attack other helper T—lymphocytes. This is
repeated leading to a progressive decrease in the number of helper T-
lymphocytes in the body of the infected person. During this period, the person
suffers from bouts of fever, diarrhoea and weight loss. Due to decrease in
the number of helperT lymphocytes, the person starts suffering from infections
that could have been otherwise overcome such as those due to bacteria
especially Mycobacterium, viruses, fungi and even parasites like Toxoplasma
The patient becomes so immuno-deﬁcient that he/ she is unable to protect
himself/herself against these infections. A widely used diagnostic test for
AIDS is enzyme linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA). Treatment of AIDS
with anti-retroviral drugs is only partially effective. They can only prolong
the life of the patient but cannot prevent death, which is inevitable.

Prevention of AIDS : As AIDS has no cure, prevention is the best option.
Moreover, HIV infection, more often, spreads due to conscious behaviour
patterns and is not something that happens inadvertently, like pneumonia
or typhoid. Of course, infection in blood transfusion patients, new-borns
(from mother) etc., may take place due to poor monitoring. The only excuse
may be ignorance and it has been rightly said — “don’t die of ignorance”.
In our country the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) and other
non-governmental organisation (NGOs) are doing a lot to educate people
about AIDS. WHO has started a number of programmes to prevent the
spreading of HIV infection. Making blood (from blood banks) safe from
HIV, ensuring the use of only disposable needles and syringes in public
and private hospitals and clinics, free distribution of condoms, controlling
drug abuse, advocating safe sex and promoting regular check-ups for
HIV in susceptible populations, are some such steps taken up.
Infection with HIV or having AIDS is something that should not be
hidden — since then, the infection may spread to many more people.
HIV/AIDS-infected people need help and sympathy instead of being
shunned by society. Unless society recognises it as a problem to be dealt
with in a collective manner — the chances of wider spread of the disease
increase manifold. It is a malady that can only be tackled, by the society
and medical fraternity acting together, to prevent the spread of the disease.

8.4 CANCER

Cancer is one of the most dreaded diseases of human beings and is a major
cause of death all over the globe. More than a million Indians suffer from

2019-2020