112

   

Mandible

labrum

 

BIOLOGY

Head is triangular in shape and lies anteriorly at right angles to the
longitudinal body axis. It is formed by the fusion of six segments and
shows great mobility in all directions due to ﬂexible neck (Figure 7 . 15).
The head capsule bears a pair of compound eyes. A pair of thread like
antennae arise from membranous sockets lying in front of eyes. Antennae
have sensory receptors that help in monitoring the environment. Anterior
end of the head bears appendages forming biting and chewing type of
mouth parts. The mouthparts consisting of a labrum (upper lip), a pair
of mandibles, a pair of maxillae and a labium (lower lip). A median ﬂexible
lobe, acting as tongue (hypopharynx), lies within the cavity enclosed by
the mouthparts Wigure 7. 15b). Thorax consists of three parts — prothorax,
mesothorax and metathorax. The head is connected with thorax by a
short extension of the prothorax known as the neck. Each thoracic segment
bears a pair of walking legs. The ﬁrst pair of wings arises from mesothorax
and the second pair from metathorax. Forewings (mesothoracic) called
tegmina are opaque dark and leathery and cover the hind wings when at
rest. The hind wings are transparent, membranous and are used in ﬂight.

The abdomen in both males and females consists of 10 segments. In
females, the 7 ‘1‘ sternum is boat shaped and together with the 8th and 9‘11
sterna forms a brood or genital pouch whose anterior part contains female
gonopore, spermathecal pores and collateral glands. In males, genital pouch
or chamber lies at the hind end of abdomen bounded dorsally by 9‘11 and
10th terga and ventrally by the 9th sternum. It contains dorsal anus, ventral
male genital pore and gonapophysis. Males bear a pair of short, thread-
like anal styles which are absent in females. In both sexes, the 10th segment
bears a pair of j ointed ﬁlamentous structures called anal cerci.

  
 
   

Mandible region

Grinding
] region
llncising u

 

Labium
(bl

(a) Labium

Figure 7.15 Head region of cockroach : (a) parts of head region (b) mouth parts