88

 

BIOLOGY

and phloem ﬁbres. Gymnosperms have albuminous cells and sieve cells.
They lack sieve tubes and companion cells. Sieve tube elements are
also long, tube-like structures, arranged longitudinally and are
associated with the companion cells. Their end walls are perforated in a
sieve-like manner to form the sieve plates. A mature sieve element
possesses a peripheral cytoplasm and a large vacuole but lacks a nucleus.
The functions of sieve tubes are controlled by the nucleus of companion
cells. The companion cells are specialised parenchymatous cells, which
are closely associated with sieve tube elements. The sieve tube elements
and companion cells are connected by pit ﬁelds present between their
common longitudinal walls. The companion cells help in maintaining the
pressure gradient in the sieve tubes. Phloem parenchyma is made up
of elongated, tapering cylindrical cells which have dense cytoplasm and
nucleus. The cell wall is composed of cellulose and has pits through which
plasmodesmatal connections exist between the cells. The phloem
parenchyma stores food material and other substances like resins, latex
and mucilage. Phloem parenchyma is absent in most of the
monocotyledons. Phloem fibres (bast fibres) are made up of
sclerenchymatous cells. These are generally absent in the primary phloem
but are found in the secondary phloem. These are much elongated,
unbranched and have pointed, needle like apices. The cell wall of phloem
ﬁbres is quite thick. At maturity, these ﬁbres lose their protoplasm and
become dead. Phloem ﬁbres of jute, ﬂax and hemp are used commercially.
The ﬁrst formed primary phloem consists of narrow sieve tubes and is
referred to as protophloem and the later formed phloem has bigger sieve
tubes and is referred to as metaphloem.

6.2 THE TISSUE SYSTEM

We were discussing types of tissues based on the types of cells present.
Let us now consider how tissues vary depending on their location in the
plant body. Their structure and function would also be dependent on
location. On the basis of their structure and location, there are three types
of tissue systems. These are the epidermal tissue system, the ground or
ﬁindamental tissue system and the vascular or conducting tissue system.

6.2. 1 Epidermal Tissue System

The epidermal tissue system forms the outer-most covering of the whole
plant body and comprises epidermal cells, stomata and the epidermal
appendages — the trichomes and hairs. The epidermis is the outermost
layer of the primary plant body. It is made up of elongated, compactly