PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

In the ﬁrst case, the modiﬁed allele is equivalent to the unmodiﬁed allele,
i.e., itwill produce the same phenotype / trait, i.e., result in the transformation
of substrate 8. Such equivalent allele pairs are very common. But, if the
allele produces a non-functional enzyme or no enzyme, the phenotype may
be effected. The phenotype / trait will only be dependent on the functioning
of the unmodiﬁed allele. The unmodiﬁed (functioning) allele, which represents
the original phenotype is the dominant allele and the modiﬁed allele is
generally the recessive allele. Hence, in the example above the recessive trait
is seen due to non-functional enzyme or because no enzyme is produced.

5.2.2.2 Co-dominance

Till now we were discussing crosses where the F1 resembled either of the
two parents (dominance) or was in—between (incomplete dominance). But,
in the case of co-dominance the F1 generation resembles both parents. A
good example is different types of red blood cells that determine ABO
blood grouping in human beings. ABO blood groups are controlled by
the gene I. The plasma membrane of the red blood cells has sugar polymers
that protrude from its surface and the kind of sugar is controlled by the
gene. The gene (1) has three alleles I", 1‘B and i. The alleles I“ and I“ produce
a slightly different form of the sugar while allele i does not produce any
sugar. Because humans are diploid organisms, each person possesses
any two of the three I gene alleles. IA and IB are completely dominant over
i, in other words when IA and i are present only I“ expresses (because i
does not produce any sugar), and when 15’ and i are present IB expresses.
But when 1A and IB are present together they both express their own types
of sugars: this is because of co-dominance. Hence red blood cells have
both A and B types of sugars. Since there are three different alleles, there
are six different combinations of these three alleles that are possible, and
therefore, a total of six different genotypes of the human ABO blood types
(Table 5.2). How many phenotypes are possible?

Table 5.2: Table Showing the Genetic Basis of Blood Groups
in Human Population

Allele from Allele from Genotype of Blood
Parent 1 Parent 2 offspring types of
offspring

I IA IA IAIA A

 

|
I IA IB IAIB AB I
I IA i IAi A I
I IB IA IAIB AB I
I IB IB [BIB B I
I IB i IBi B I

Ii i ii 0

2019-2020