CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE 133

  
   
    

structure and function, many of these are
considered together as an endomembrane system
because their functions are coordinated. The
endomembrane system include endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), golgi complex, lysosomes and
vacuoles. Since the functions of the mitochondria,
chloroplast and peroxisomes are not coordinated
with the above components, these are not
considered as part of the endomembrane system.

Nucleus

Nuclear pore Rough
endoplasmic

reticulum

8.5.3.1 The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)

Electron microscopic studies of eukaryotic cells
reveal the presence of a network or reticulum of
tiny tubular structures scattered in the cytoplasm
that is called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
(Figure 8.5). Hence, ER divides the intracellular
space into two distinct compartments, i.e., luminal
(inside ER) and extra luminal (cytoplasm)
compartments.

The ER often shows ribosomes attached to
their outer surface. The endoplasmic reticulun
bearing ribosomes on their surface is called rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER). In the absence of

. Endoplasmic
ribosomes they appear smooth and are called reticulum
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER)- Figure 8.5 Endoplasmic reticulum

RER is frequently observed in the cells actively
involved in protein synthesis and secretion. They
are extensive and continuous with the outer
membrane of the nucleus.

The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is the major
site for synthesis of lipid. In animal cells lipid-like
steroidal hormones are synthesised in SER.

Cisternae

8.5.3.2 Golgi apparatus

Camillo Golgi (1898) ﬁrst observed densely stained
reticular structures near the nucleus. These were
later named Golgi bodies after him. They consist
of many ﬂat, disc-shaped sacs or cisternae of
0.5um to 1.0um diameter (Figure 8.6). These are
stacked parallel to each other. Varied number of
cisternae are present in a Golgi complex. The Golgi
cisternae are concentrically arranged near the
nucleus with distinct convex cis or the forming Figure 8.6 Golgi apparatus

201 9-2020