BIOLOGY

 

with unrelated superior animals of the same breed. This usually helps
restore fertility and yield.

Out-breeding : Out-breeding is the breeding of the unrelated animals,
which may be between individuals of the same breed but having no
common ancestors for 4-6 generations (out-crossing) or between
different breeds (cross-breeding) or different species (inter-specific
hybridisation) .

Out-crossing: This is the practice of mating of animals within the same
breed, but having no common ancestors on either side of their pedigree
up to 4-6 generations. The offspring of such a mating is known as an
out-cross. It is the best breeding method for animals that are below
average in productivity in milk production, growth rate in beef cattle,
etc. A single outcross often helps to overcome inbreeding depression.

Cross-breeding: In this method, superior males of one breed are mated
with superior females of another breed. Cross-breeding allows the
desirable qualities of two different breeds to be combined. The progeny
hybrid animals may themselves be used for commercial production.
Alternatively, they may be subjected to some form of inbreeding and
selection to develop new stable breeds that may be superior to the existing
breeds. Many new animal breeds have been developed by this approach.
Hisardale is a new breed of sheep developed in Punjab by crossing
Bikaneri ewes and Marino rams.

Interspecific hybridisation: In this method, male and female animals
of two different related species are mated. In some cases, the progeny
may combine desirable features of both the parents, and may be of
considerable economic value, e.g., the mule (Figure 9.2). Do you know
what cross leads to the production of the mule?

Controlled breeding experiments are carried out using artiﬁcial

insemination. The semen is collected from the male that

is chosen as a parent and injected into the reproductive

tract of the selected female by the breeder. The semen

may be used immediately or can be frozen and used at a

later date. It can also be transported in a frozen form to

where the female is housed. In this way desirable matings

are carried. Artiﬁcial insemination helps us overcome

several problems of normal matings. Can you discuss
and list some of them?

Often, the success rate of crossing mature male and

Figure 9-2 M1116 female animals is fairly low even though artificial

insemination is carried out. To improve chances of

successful production of hybrids, other means are also used. Multiple

Ovulation Embryo Transfer Technology (MOET) is one such

programme for herd improvement. In this method, a cow is administered

hormones, with FSH-like activity, to induce follicular maturation and super

ovulation — instead of one egg, which they normally yield per cycle, they

 

 

2019—2020