236

(iv)

 

BIOLOGY

vector (mosquito) to spread to other hosts. Majority of the parasites
harm the host; they may reduce the survival, growth and
reproduction of the host and reduce its population density. They
might render the host more vulnerable to predation by making it
physically weak. Do you believe that an ideal parasite should be
able to thrive within the host without harming it? Then why didn’t
natural selection lead to the evolution of such totally harmless
parasites?

Parasites that feed on the external surface of the host organism
are called ectoparasites. The most familiar examples of this group
are the lice on humans and ticks on dogs. Many marine ﬁsh are
infested with ectoparasitic copepods. Cuscuta, a parasitic plant that
is commonly found growing on hedge plants, has lost its chlorophyll
and leaves in the course of evolution. It derives its nutrition from
the host plant which it parasitises. The female mosquito is not
considered a parasite, although it needs our blood for reproduction.
Can you explain why?

In contrast, endoparasites are those that live inside the host
body at different sites (liver, kidney, lungs, red blood cells, etc.).
The life cycles of endoparasites are more complex because of their
extreme specialisation. Their morphological and anatomical features
are greatly simpliﬁed while emphasising their reproductive potential.

Brood parasitism in birds is a fascinating example of parasitism
in which the parasitic bird lays its eggs in the nest of its host and
lets the host incubate them. During the course of evolution, the
eggs of the parasitic bird have evolved to resemble the host’s egg in
size and colour to reduce the chances of the host bird detecting the
foreign eggs and ejecting them from the nest. Try to follow the
movements of the cuckoo (koel) and the crow in your neighborhood
park during the breeding season (spring to summer) and watch
brood parasitism in action.

Commensalism: This is the interaction in which one species beneﬁts
and the other is neither harmed nor beneﬁted. An orchid growing
as an epiphyte on a mango branch, and barnacles growing on the
back of a whale beneﬁt while neither the mango tree nor the whale
derives any apparent beneﬁt. The cattle egret and grazing cattle in
close association, a sight you are most likely to catch if you live in
farmed rural areas, is a classic example of commensalism. The
egrets always forage close to where the cattle are grazing because
the cattle, as they move, stir up and ﬂush out insects from the
vegetation that otherwise might be difﬁcult for the egrets to ﬁnd
and catch. Another example of commensalism is the interaction

2019—2020