22

 

BIOLOGY

their prey by putting out pseudopodia (false feet) as in Amoeba. Marine
forms have silica shells on their surface. Some of them such as Entamoeba
are parasites.

Flagellated protozoans: The members of this group are either free-living
or parasitic. They have ﬂagella. The parasitic forms cause diaseases such
as sleeping sickness. Example: Trypanosoma.

Ciliated protozoans: These are aquatic, actively moving organisms because
of the presence of thousands of cilia. They have a cavity (gullet) that opens
to the outside of the cell surface. The coordinated movement of rows of
cilia causes the water laden with food to be steered into the gullet. Example:
Paramoecium (Figure 2.4b).

Sporozoans: This includes diverse organisms that have an infectious
spore-like stage in their life cycle. The most notorious is Plasmodium
(malarial parasite) which causes malaria, a disease which has a staggering
effect on human population.

2.3 KINGDOM FUNGI

The fungi constitute a unique kingdom of heterotrophic organisms. They
show a great diversity in morphology and habitat. You must have seen
fungi on a moist bread and rotten fruits. The common mushroom you eat
and toadstools are also fungi. White spots seen on mustard leaves are due
to a parasitic fungus. Some unicellular fungi, e. g., yeast are used to make
bread and beer. Other fungi cause diseases in plants and animals; wheat
rust-causing Puccinia is an important example. Some are the source of
antibiotics, e. g., Penicillium. Fungi are cosmopolitan and occur in air, water,
soil and on animals and plants. They prefer to grow in warm and humid
places. Have you ever wondered why we keep food in the refrigerator ‘? Yes,
it is to prevent food from going bad due to bacterial or fungal infections.

With the exception of yeasts which are unicellular, fungi are
ﬁlamentous. Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structures
called hyphae. The network of hyphae is known as mycelium. Some hyphae
are continuous tubes ﬁlled with multinucleated cytoplasm — these are
called coenocytic hyphae. Others have septae or cross walls in their
hyphae. The cell walls of fungi are composed of chitin and polysaccharides.

Most fungi are heterotrophic and absorb soluble organic matter from
dead substrates and hence are called saprophytes. Those that depend
on living plants and animals are called parasites. They can also live as
symbionts — in association with algae as lichens and with roots of higher
plants as mycorrhiza.

Reproduction in fungi can take place by vegetative means —
fragmentation, ﬁssion and budding. Asexual reproduction is by spores