MINERAL NUTRITION

is available in soil. Thus, nitrogen is
a limiting nutrient for both natural Atmospheric N2
and agricultural eco-systems.
Nitrogen exists as two nitrogen atoms
joined by a very strong triple covalent
bond (N N). The process of
conversion of nitrogen (NZ) to
ammonia is termed as nitrogen-

 

Biological Industrial Electrical Denitriﬁcation
N2 ﬁxation N2 ﬁxation N2 ﬁxation

       
 
   

fixation. In nature, lightning and

ultraviolet radiation provide enough I I
energy to convert nitrogen to nitrogen

oxides (NO, N02, N20). Industrial (Ammoniﬁcation) (Uptake)

combustions, forest fires, automobile
exhausts and power-generating
stations are also sources of
atmospherlc n1trogen ox1des.

Decomposition of organic nitrogen of

dead plants and animals into J

ammonia is called ammonification.

Some of this ammonia volatilises and

re-enters the atmosphere bUt mOSt 0f Figure 12.3 The nitrogen cycle showing

it is converted into nitrate by soil relatiOHShiP between the three

bacteria in the following steps: m‘f‘m nitrogen 130018 _ atmOSpheﬁc
$011, and blomass

2NH3 +30 —> 2N0; +@H2® o ‘1" ....(i)

2NO2 +o2 —> 2N0; ...... (ii)

Ammonia is ﬁrst oxidised to nitrite by the bacteria Nitrosomonas and / or
Nitrococcus. The nitrite is further oxidised to nitrate with the help of the
bacterium Nitrobacter. These steps are called nitriﬁcation (Figure 12.3).
These nitrifying bacteria are chemoautotrophs.

The nitrate thus formed is absorbed by plants and is transported to
the leaves. In leaves, it is reduced to form ammonia that ﬁnally forms the
amine group of amino acids. Nitrate present in the soil is also reduced to
nitrogen by the process of denitriﬁcation. Denitriﬁcation is carried by
bacteria Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus.

12.6.2 Biological Nitrogen Fixation

Very few living organisms can utilise the nitrogen in the form N2, available
abundantly in the air. Only certain prokaryotic species are capable of
ﬁxing nitrogen. Reduction of nitrogen to ammonia by living organisms is