266

 

BIOLOGY

PEM

Dietary deﬁciencies of proteins and total food calories are widespread in
many underdeveloped countries of South and South-east Asia, South
America, and West and Central Africa. Protein-energy malnutrition
(PEM) may affect large sections of the population during drought, famine
and political turmoil. This happened in Bangladesh during the liberation
war and in Ethiopia during the severe drought in mid-eighties. PEM affects
infants and children to produce Marasmus and Kwashiorkar.
Marasmus is produced by a simultaneous deﬁciency of proteins and
calories. It is found in infants less than a year in age, if mother’s milk is
replaced too early by other foods which are poor in both proteins and
caloric value. This often happens if the mother has second pregnancy or
childbirth when the older infant is still too young. In Marasmus, protein
deﬁciency impairs growth and replacement of tissue proteins; extreme
emaciation of the body and thinning of limbs results, the skin becomes
dry, thin and wrinkled. Growth rate and body weight decline considerably.
Even growth and development of brain and mental faculties are impaired.
Kwashiorkar is produced by protein deﬁciency unaccompanied by calorie
deﬁciency. It results ﬁom the replacement of mother’s milk by a high calorie-
low protein diet in a child more than one year in age. Like marasmus,
kwashiorkor shows wasting of muscles, thinning of limbs, failure of growth
and brain development. But unlike marasmus, some fat is still left under
the skin; moreover, extensive oedema and swelling of body parts are seen.

SUMMARY

The digestive system of humans consists of an alimentary canal and
associated digestive glands. The alimentary canal consists of the mouth,
buccal cavity, pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large
intestine, rectumﬁiﬁd‘ the anus. The accessory digestive glands include the
salivary glands,the liver (with gall bladder) and the pancreas. Inside the
mouth the teéth masticates the food, the tongue tastes the food and
manipulates it for proper mastication by mixing with the saliva. Saliva
contains a starch digestive enzyme, salivary amylase that digests the starch
and converts it into maltose (disaccharide). The food then passes into the
pharynx and enters the oesophagus in the form of bolus, which is further
carried down through the oesophagus by peristalsis into the stomach. In
stomach mainly protein digestion takes place. Absorption of simple sugars,
alcohol and medicines also takes place in the stomach.

The chyme (food) enters into the duodenum portion of the small
intestine and is acted on by the pancreatic juice, bile and ﬁnally by the
enzymes in the succus entericus, so that the digestion of carbohydrates,
proteins and fats is completed. The food then enters into the jejunum and
ileum portions of the small intestine. Carbohydrates are digested and
converted into monosaccharides like glucose. Proteins are ﬁnally broken
down into amino acids. The fats are converted to fatty acids and glycerol.