32

 

BIOLOGY

Algae are useful to man in a variety of ways. At least a half of the total
carbon dioxide fixation on earth is carried out by algae through
photosynthesis. Being photosynthetic they increase the level of dissolved
oxygen in their immediate environment. They are of paramount
importance as primary producers of energy-rich compounds which form
the basis of the food cycles of all aquatic animals. Many species of Porphyra,
Laminaria and Sargassum are among the 7 0 species of marine algae
used as food. Certain marine brown and red algae produce large amounts
of hydrocolloids (water holding substances), e. g., algin (brown algae) and
carrageen (red algae) which are used commercially. Agar, one of the
commercial products obtained from Gelidium and Gracilaria are used to
grow microbes and in preparations of ice-creams and jellies. Chlorella a
unicellular alga rich in proteins is used as food supplement even by space
travellers. The algae are divided into three main classes: Chlorophyceae,
Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.

3. 1 . 1 Chlorophyceae

The members of chlorophyceae are commonly called green algae. The
plant body may be unicellular, colonial or ﬁlamentous. They are usually
grass green due to the dominance of pigments chlorophyll a and b. The
pigments are localised in deﬁnite chloroplasts. The chloroplasts may be
discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon-shaped in
different species. Most of the members have one or more storage bodies
called pyrenoids located in the chloroplasts. Pyrenoids contain protein
besides starch. Some algae may store food in the form of oil droplets.
Green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made of an inner layer of cellulose
and an outer layer of pectose.

Vegetative reproduction usually takes place by fragmentation or by
formation of different types of spores. Asexual reproduction is by
ﬂagellated zoospores produced in zoosporangia. The sexual reproduction
shows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells and it
may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous. Some commonly found
green algae are: Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ulothrix, Spirogyra and Chara
(Figure 3.1a).

3. 1 .2 Phaeophyceae

The members of phaeophyceae or brown algae are found primarily in
marine habitats. They show great variation in size and form. They range
from simple branched, ﬁlamentous forms (Ectocarpus) to profusely
branched forms as represented by kelps, which may reach a height of
100 metres. They possess chlorophyll a, c, carotenoids and xanthophylls.
They vary in colour from olive green to various shades of brown depending
upon the amount of the xanthophyll pigment, fucoxanthin present in