BIOLOGY

chromosomes (polyploidy) or change in a subset of chromosome number
(aneuploidy). This helped in understanding the mutational basis of
genetic disorders. Down’s syndrome is due to trisomy of chromosome 21,
where there is an extra copy of chromosome 21 and consequently the
total number of chromosome becomes 47. In Turner’s syndrome, one X
chromosome is missing and the sex chromosome is as X0, and in
Kh'nefelter’s syndrome, the condition is XXY. These can be easily studied

by analysis of Karyotypes.

 

 

EXERCISES

1. Mention the advantages of selecting pea plant for experiment by Mendel.

2. Differentiate between the following —
(a) Dominance and Recessive
(b) Homozygous and Heterozygous
(c) Monohybrid and Dihybrid.

3. A diploid organism is heterozygous for 4 loci, how many types of gametes

can be produced?
4. Explain the Law of Dominance using a monohybrid cross.
5. Define and design a test-cross.

6. Using a Punnett Square, workout the distribution of phenotypic features
in the ﬁrst filial generation after a cross between a homozygous female

and a heterozygous male for a single locus.

7. When a cross in made between tall plant with yellow seeds (TtYy) and
tall plant with green seed (Ttyy), what proportions of phenotype in the

offspring could be expected to be
(a) tall and green.
(b) dwarf and green.

8. Two heterozygous parents are crossed. If the two loci are linked what
would be the distribution of phenotypic features in F1 generation for a

dibybrid cross?
9. Brieﬂy mention the contribution of TH. Morgan in genetics.

10. What is pedigree analysis? Suggest how such an analysis, can be useful.

1 1. How is sex determined in human beings?

12. A child has blood group 0. If the father has blood group A and mother
blood group B, work out the genotypes of the parents and the possible

genotypes of the other offsprings.
13. Explain the following terms with example
(a) Co-dominance
(b) Incomplete dominance
14. What is point mutation? Give one example.
15. Who had proposed the chromosomal theory of the inheritance?

16. Mention any two autosomal genetic disorders with their symptoms.

 

 

2019-2020