MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS 67

5.1. 1 Regions of the Root

The root is covered at the apex by a thimble-like
structure called the root cap (Figure 5.3) . It
protects the tender apex of the root as it makes

   
 

its way through the soil. A few millimetres above Region of
the root cap is the region of meristematic maturation
activity. The cells of this region are very small, Root hair

thin-walled and with dense protoplasm. They

divide repeatedly. The cells proximal to this

region undergo rapid elongation and Region of
enlargement and are responsible for the growth elongation

of the root in length. This region is called the

region of elongation. The cells of the elongation Region of

zone gradually differentiate and mature. Hence, '-.-...-. } meﬁstematic

this zone, proximal to region of elongation, is Root cap
called the region of maturation. From this
region some of the epidermal cells form very fine
and delicate, thread-like structures called root
hairs. These root hairs absorb water and
minerals from the soil.

activity

Figure 5.3 The regions of the root-tip

5.1.2 Modiﬁcations of Root

Roots in some plants change their shape and
structure and become modified to perform
functions other than absorption and
conduction of water and minerals. They are
modified for support, storage of food and
respiration (Figure 5.4 and 5.5). Tap roots of
carrot, turnip and adventitious roots of sweet
potato, get swollen and store food. Can you give
some more such examples? Have you ever
wondered what those hanging structures that
support a banyan tree are? These are called
prop roots. Similarly, the stems of maize and
sugarcane have supporting roots coming out
of the lower nodes of the stem. These are called
stilt roots. In some plants such as Rhizophora
growing in swampy areas, many roots come out
of the ground and grow vertically upwards.

Such rOOtS’ called pneumatophores, help to Figure 5.4 Modification of root for support:
get oxygen for respiration (Figure 5.5b). Banyan tree