BIOLOGY

called ‘Terror of Bengal’. They grow abundantly in
eutrophic water bodies, and lead to an imbalance in the
ecosystem dynamics of the water body.

Sewage from our homes as well as from hospitals are
likely to contain many undesirable pathogenic micro-
organisms, and its disposal into a water without proper
treatment may cause outbreak of serious diseases, such
as, dysentery, typhoid, jaundice, cholera, etc.

Unlike domestic sewage, waste water from industries
like petroleum, paper manufacturing, metal extraction and
processing, chemical manufacturing, etc., often contain
toxic substances, notably, heavy metals (defined as
elements with density > 5 g/cm3 such as mercury,
cadmium, copper, lead, etc.) and a variety of organic
compounds.

A few toxic substances, often present in industrial
waste waters, can undergo biological magnification
(Biomagnification) in the aquatic food chain.
Biomagniﬁcation refers to increase in concentration of
the toxicant at successive trophic levels. This happens

Zooplankton because a toxic substance accumulated by an organism
(DDT 0.04 ppm) cannot be metabolised or excreted, and is thus passed on
to the next higher trophic level. This phenomenon is well-

known for mercury and DDT. Figure 1 6.5 shows

biomagniﬁcation of DDT in an aquatic food chain. In this

manner, the concentration of DDT is increased at

Water successive trophic levels; say if it starts at 0.003 ppb
(ppb = parts per billion) in water, it can ultimately reach

25 ppm (ppm = parts per million) in ﬁsh-eating birds,
through biomagniﬁcation. High concentrations of DDT
Figure 16.5 Biomagnification of disturb calcium metabolism in birds, which causes
DDT in an aquatic thinning of eggshell and their premature breaking,

fOOd chain eventually causing decline in bird populations.
Eutrophication is the natural aging of a lake by
nutrient enrichment of its water. In a young lake the water is cold and
clear, supporting little life. With time, streams draining into the lake
introduce nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, which encourage
the growth of aquatic organisms. As the lake’s fertility increases, plant
2 7 6 and animal life burgeons, and organic remains begin to be deposited on
the lake bottom. Over the centuries, as silt and organic debris pile up, the
lake grows shallower and warmer, with warm-water organisms
supplanting those that thrive in a cold environment. Marsh plants take
root in the shallows and begin to ﬁll in the original lake basin. Eventually,
the lake gives way to large masses of ﬂoating plants (bog), ﬁnally converting
into land. Depending on climate, size of the lake and other factors, the

2019-2020