EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

 

(PCT). A hairpin shaped Henle’s loop is the Afferent arteriole
next part of the tubule which has a
descending and an ascending limb. The
ascending limb continues as another highly
coiled tubular region called distal
convoluted tubule 030T). The DCTs of many
nephrons open into a straight tube called
collecting duct, many of which converge and
open into the renal pelvis through medullary
pyramids in the calyces.

The Malpighian corpuscle, PCT and DOT
of the nephron are situated in the cortical
region of the kidney whereas the loop of Henle
dips into the medulla. In majority of
nephrons, the loop of Henle is too short and
extends only very little into the medulla. Such
nephrons are called cortical nephrons. In
some of the nephrons, the loop of Henle is
very long and runs deep into the medulla.
These nephrons are called juxta medullary
nephrons.

The efferent arteriole emerging from the glomerulus forms a ﬁne
capillary network around the renal tubule called the peritubular
capillaries. A minute vessel of this network runs parallel to the Henle’s
loop forming a ‘U’ shaped vasa recta. Vasa recta is absent or highly
reduced in cortical nephrons.

Efferent
arteriole

Bowman ’5
capsule

  
  

Proximal
convoluted tubule

Figure 19.4 Malpighian body (renal corpuscle)

19.2 URINE FORMATION

Urine formation involves three main processes namely, glomerular
ﬁltration, reabsorption and secretion, that takes place in different parts of
the nephron.

The ﬁrst step in urine formation is the ﬁltration of blood, which is carried
out by the glomerulus and is called glomerular ﬁltration. On an average,
1 100- 1200 ml of blood is ﬁltered by the kidneys per minute which constitute
roughly 1 /5“‘ of the blood pumped out by each ventricle of the heart in a
minute. The glomerular capillary blood pressure causes ﬁltration of blood
through 3 layers, i.e., the endothelium of glomerular blood vessels, the
epithelium of Bowman’s capsule and a basement membrane between these
two layers. The epithelial cells of Bowman’s capsule called podocytes are
arranged in an intricate manner so as to leave some minute spaces called
ﬁltration slits or slit pores. Blood is ﬁltered so ﬁnely through these
membranes, that almost all the constituents of the plasma except the
proteins pass onto the lumen of the Bowman’s capsule. Therefore, it is
considered as a process of ultra ﬁltration.