BIOTECHNOLOGY : PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES

‘molecular scissors’— restriction enzymes. The cut piece of DNA was
then linked with the plasmid DNA. These plasmid DNA act as vectors to
transfer the piece of DNA attached to it. You probably know that mosquito
acts as an insect vector to transfer the malarial parasite into human body.
In the same way, a plasmid can be used as vector to deliver an alien piece
of DNA into the host organism. The linking of antibiotic resistance gene
with the plasmid vector became possible with the enzyme DNA ligase,
which acts on cut DNA molecules and joins their ends. This makes a new
combination of circular autonomously replicating DNA created in vitro
and is known as recombinant DNA. When this DNA is transferred into
Escherichia coli, a bacterium closely related to Salmonella, it could
replicate using the new host’s DNA polymerase enzyme and make multiple
copies. The ability to multiply copies of antibiotic resistance gene in
E. coli was called cloning of antibiotic resistance gene in E. coli.
You can hence infer that there are three basic steps in genetically

modifying an organism —

(i) identiﬁcation of DNA with desirable genes;

(ii) introduction of the identiﬁed DNA into the host;

(iii) maintenance of introduced DNA in the host and transfer of the DNA
to its progeny.

11.2 TOOLS OF RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY

Now we know from the foregoing discussion that genetic engineering or
recombinant DNA technology can be accomplished only if we have the
key tools, i.e., restriction enzymes, polymerase enzymes, ligases, vectors
and the host organism. Let us try to understand some of these in detail.

1 1.2. 1 Restriction Enzymes

In the year 1963, the two enzymes responsible for restricting the growth
of bacteriophage in Escherichia coli were isolated. One of these added
methyl groups to DNA, while the other cut DNA. The later was called
restriction endonuclease.

The first restriction endonuclease—H ind 11, whose functioning
depended on a speciﬁc DNA nucleotide sequence was isolated and
characterised ﬁve years later. It was found that Hind II always out DNA
molecules at a particular point by recognising a speciﬁc sequence of
six base pairs. This specific base sequence is known as the
recognition sequence for Hind 11. Besides Hind 11, today we know more
than 900 restriction enzymes that have been isolated from over 230 strains
of bacteria each of which recognise different recognition sequences.

The convention for naming these enzymes is the ﬁrst letter of the name
comes from the genus and the second two letters come from the species of
the prokaryotic cell from which they were isolated, e.g., EcoRI comes from
Escherichia coli RY 13. In EcoRI, the letter ‘R’ is derived from the name of

2019—2020