218

 

BIOLOGY

Hence for every CO2 molecule entering the Calvin cycle, 3 molecules
of ATP and 2 of NADPH are required. It is probably to meet this difference
in number of ATP and NADPH used in the dark reaction that the cyclic
phosphorylation takes place.

To make one molecule of glucose 6 turns of the cycle are required.
Work out how many ATP and NADPH molecules will be required to make
one molecule of glucose through the Calvin pathway.

It might help you to understand all of this if we look at what goes in
and what comes out of the Calvin cycle.

 

13.8 THE C4 PATHWAY

Plants that are adapted to dry tropical regions have the C 4 pathway
mentioned earlier. Though these plants have the C 4 oxaloacetic acid as
the ﬁrst CO2 ﬁxation product they use the C3 pathway or the Calvin cycle
as the main biosynthetic pathway. Then, in what way are they different
from C3 plants? This is a question that you may reasonably ask.

C 4 plants are special: They have a special type of leaf anatomy, they
tolerate higher temperatures, they show a response to high light intensities,
they lack a process called photorespiration and have greater productivity
of biomass. Let us understand these one by one.

Study vertical sections of leaves, one of a C3 plant and the other of a C 4
plant. Do you notice the differences? Do both have the same types of
mesophylls? Do they have similar cells around the vascular bundle sheath?

The particularly large cells around the vascular bundles of the C 4
plants are called bundle sheath cells, and the leaves which have such
anatomy are said to have ‘Kranz’ anatomy. ‘Kranz’ means ‘wreath’ and
is a reﬂection of the arrangement of cells. The bundle sheath cells may
form several layers around the vascular bundles; they are characterised
by having a large number of chloroplasts, thick walls impervious to
gaseous exchange and no intercellular spaces. You may like to cut a
section of the leaves of C 4 plants — maize or sorghum — to observe the
Kranz anatomy and the distribution of mesophyll cells.

It would be interesting for you to collect leaves of diverse species of
plants around you and cut vertical sections of the leaves. Observe under
the microscope — look for the bundle sheath around the vascular
bundles. The presence of the bundle sheath would help you identify
the C 4 plants.