TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

1 1.6. 1 The Pressure Flow or Mass Flow Hypothesis

The accepted mechanism used for the translocation of sugars from source
to sink is called the pressure ﬂow hypothesis. (see Figure 1 1.10). As
glucose is prepared at the source (by photosynthesis) it is converted to
sucrose (a dissacharide). The sugar is then moved in the form of sucrose
into the companion cells and then into the living phloem sieve tube cells
by active transport. This process of loading at the source produces a
hypertonic condition in the phloem. Water in the adjacent xylem moves
into the phloem by osmosis. As osmotic pressure builds up the phloem
sap will move to areas of lower pressure. At the sink osmotic pressure
must be reduced. Again active transport is necessary to move the sucrose
out of the phloem sap and into the cells which will use the sugar —
converting it into energy, starch, or cellulose. As sugars are removed, the
osmotic pressure decreases and water moves out of the phloem.

To summarise, the movement of sugars in the phloem begins at the
source, where sugars are loaded (actively transported) into a sieve tube.
Loading of the phloem sets up a water potential gradient that facilitates
the mass movement in the phloem.

Phloem tissue is composed of sieve tube cells, which form long columns
with holes in their end walls called sieve plates. Cytoplasmic strands pass
through the holes in the sieve plates, so forming continuous ﬁlaments. As
hydrostatic pressure in the sieve tube of phloem increases, pressure ﬂow
begins, and the sap moves through the phloem. Meanwhile, at the sink,
incoming sugars are actively transported out of the phloem and removed

Sugars leave sieve tubes;
water follows by osmosis

   
 
  
   
   
  
  
   

Tip of stem

Sugar solution ﬂows
to regions of low
turgor pressure

1

Phloem

for metabolism and
storage; water follows
by osmosis

Root

Sugars enter sieve tubes;
water follows by osmosis

Sugars leave sieve tube

=High
turgor
pressure

Figure11.10 Diagrammatic presentation of mechanism of translocation

191