MICROBES IN HUMAN WELFARE

 

pneumonia. For more than a hundred years, microbes are being used
to treat sewage (waste water) by the process of activated sludge formation
and this helps in recycling of water in nature. Methanogens produce
methane (biogas) while degrading plant waste. Biogas produced by
microbes is used as a source of energy in rural areas. Microbes can also
be used to kill harmful pests, a process called as biocontrol. The
biocontrol measures help us to avoid heavy use of toxic pesticides for
controlling pests. There is a need these days to push for use of
biofertilisers in place of chemical fertilisers. It is clear from the diverse
uses human beings have put microbes to that they play an important
role in the welfare of human society.

 

 

 

 

{m

 

 

EXERCISES

1. Bacteria cannot be seen with the naked eyes, but these can be seen
with the help of a microscope. If you have to carry a sample from your
home to your biology laboratory to demonstrate the presence of microbes
with the help of a microscope. which sample would you carry and why?

2. Give examples to prove that microbes release gases during metabolism.

3. In which food would you find lactic acid bacteria? Mention some of
their useful applications.

4. Name some traditional Indian foods made of wheat, rice and Bengal
gram (or their products) which involve use of microbes.

5. In which way have microbes played a major role in controlling diseases
caused by harmful bacteria?

6. Name any two species of fungus. which are used in the production of
the antibiotics.

7. What is sewage? In which way can sewage be harmful to us?

8. What is the key difference between primary and secondary sewage
treatment?

9. Do you think microbes can also be used as source of energy? Ifyes, how?

10. Microbes can be used to decrease the use of chemical fertilisers and
pesticides. Explain how this can be accomplished.

1 1. Three water samples namely river water, untreated sewage water and
secondary efﬂuent discharged from a sewage treatment plant were
subjected to BOD test. The samples were labelled A, B and C; but the
laboratory attendant did not note which was which. The BOD values
of the three samples A, B and C were recorded as 20mg/L, 8mg/ L and
400mg/L. respectively. Which sample of the water is most polluted?
Can you assign the correct label to each assuming the river water is
relatively clean?

 

2019-2020