286 BIOLOGY

Figure 18.3), a patient is connected to the
machine with three electrical leads (one to each
wrist and to the left ankle) that continuously
monitor the heart activity. For a detailed
evaluation of the heart’s function, multiple
leads are attached to the chest region. Here,
we will talk only about a standard ECG.

Each peak in the ECG is identiﬁed with a
Figure 18. 3 Diagrammaﬂc presentation of a letter from P to T that corresponds to a speciﬁc

standard ECG electrical activity of the heart.

The P-wave represents the electrical

excitation (or depolarisation) of the atria,

which leads to the contraction of both the atria.
The QRS complex represents the depolarisation of the ventricles,

which initiates the ventricular contraction. The contraction starts shortly
after Q and marks the beginning of the systole.

The T-wave represents the return of the ventricles from excited to normal
state (repolarisation). The end of the T-wave marks the end of systole.

Obviously, by counting the number of QRS complexes that occur in a
given time period, one can determine the heart beat rate of an individual.
Since the ECGs obtained from different individuals have roughly the same
shape for a given lead conﬁguration, any deviation from this shape indicates
a possible abnormality or disease. Hence, it is of a great clinical signiﬁcance.

 

18.4 DOUBLE CIRCULATION

The blood ﬂows strictly by a ﬁxed route through Blood Vessels—the
arteries and veins. Basically, each artery and vein consists of three layers:
an inner lining of squamous endothelium, the tunica intima, a middle
layer of smooth muscle and elastic fibres, the tunica media, and an
external layer of ﬁbrous connective tissue with collagen ﬁbres, the tunica
externa. The tunica media is comparatively thin in the veins (Figure
1 8.4) .

As mentioned earlier, the blood pumped by the right ventricle enters
the pulmonary artery, whereas the left ventricle pumps blood into the
aorta. The deoxygenated blood pumped into the pulmonary artery is
passed on to the lungs from where the oxygenated blood is carried by
the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. This pathway constitutes the
pulmonary circulation. The oxygenated blood entering the aorta is
carried by a network of arteries, arterioles and capillaries to the tissues
from where the deoxygenated blood is collected by a system of venules,
veins and vena cava and emptied into the right atrium. This is the
systemic circulation (Figure 18.4). The systemic circulation provides
nutrients, O2 and other essential substances to the tissues and takes
CO2 and other harmful substances away for elimination. A unique
vascular connection exists between the digestive tract and liver called