RESPIRATION IN PLANTS

Now let us compare fermentation and aerobic respiration:

' Fermentation accounts for only a partial breakdown of glucose

whereas in aerobic respiration it is completely degraded to CO2 and
H20.

° In fermentation there is a net gain of only two molecules of ATP for
each molecule of glucose degraded to pyruvic acid whereas many
more molecules of ATP are generated under aerobic conditions.

' NADH is oxidised to NAD+ rather slowly in fermentation, however
the reaction is very vigorous in case of aerobic respiration.

14.6 AMPHIBOLIC PATHWAY

Glucose is the favoured substrate for respiration. All carbohydrates are
usually ﬁrst converted into glucose before they are used for respiration.
Other substrates can also be respired, as has been mentioned earlier, but
then they do not enter the respiratory pathway at the ﬁrst step. See Figure
14.6 to see the points of entry of different substrates in the respiratory
pathway. Fats would need to be broken down into glycerol and fatty acids
ﬁrst. If fatty acids were to be respired they would ﬁrst be degraded to
acetyl CoA and enter the pathway. Glycerol would enter the pathway
after being converted to PGAL. The proteins would be degraded by
proteases and the individual amino acids (after deamination) depending
on their structure would enter the pathway at some stage within the Krebs’
cycle or even as pyruvate or acetyl CoA.

Since respiration involves breakdown of substrates, the respiratory
process has traditionally been considered a catabolic process and the
respiratory pathway as a catabolic pathway. But is this understanding
correct? We have discussed above, at which points in the respiratory
pathway different substrates would enter if they were to be respired and
used to derive energy. What is important to recognise is that it is these very
compounds that would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for the
synthesis of the said substrates. Hence, fatty acids would be broken down
to acetyl CoA before entering the respiratory pathway when it is used as a
substrate. But when the organism needs to synthesise fatty acids, acetyl
CoA would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for it. Hence, the
respiratory pathway comes into the picture both during breakdown and
synthesis of fatty acids. Similarly, during breakdown and synthesis of
protein too, respiratory intermediates form the link. Breaking down
processes within the living organism is catabolism, and synthesis is
anabolism. Because the respiratory pathway is involved in both anabolism
and catabolism, it would hence be better to consider the respiratory pathway
as an amphibolic pathway rather than as a catabolic one.

235