BIOLOGY

phase and are therefore called seasonal breeders. Many other mammals
are reproductively active throughout their reproductive phase and hence
are called continuous breeders.

That we all grow old (if we live long enough), is something that we
recognise. But what is meant by growing old? The end of reproductive
phase can be considered as one of the parameters of senescence or old
age. There are concomitant changes in the body (like slowing of
metabolism, etc.) during this last phase of life span. Old age ultimately
leads to death.

In both plants and animals, hormones are responsible for the
transitions between the three phases. Interaction between hormones and
certain environmental factors regulate the reproductive processes and
the associated behavioural expressions of organisms.

Events in sexual reproduction 2 After attainment of maturity, all sexually
reproducing organisms exhibit events and processes that have remarkable
fundamental similarity, even though the structures associated with sexual
reproduction are indeed very different. The events of sexual reproduction
though elaborate and complex, follow a regular sequence. Sexual
reproduction is characterised by the fusion (or fertilisation) of the male and
female gametes, the formation of zygote and embryogenesis. For convenience
these sequential events may be grouped into three distinct stages namely,
the pre-fertilisation, fertilisation and the post-fertilisation events.

1 .2. 1 Pro-fertilisation Events

These include all the events of sexual reproduction prior to the fusion of
gametes. The two main pre-fertilisation events are gametogenesis and
gamete transfer.

1.2.1.1 Gametogenesis

As you are already aware, gametogenesis refers to the process of formation
of the two types of gametes — male and female. Gametes are haploid cells.

(a) (b)

 

Figure 1.5 Types of gametes: (a) Isogametes of Cladophora (an alga); (b) Heterogametes of
Fucus (an alga); (c) Heterogametes of Homo sapiens (Human beings)

2019—2020