SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

 

Figure 2.4 Scanning electron micrographs of a few pollen grains

a microscope. You will really be amazed at the variety of architecture —
sizes, shapes, colours, designs — seen on the pollen grains
from different species (Figure 2.4).

Pollen grains are generally spherical measuring about
25- 50 micrometers in diameter. It has a prominent two-layered
wall. The hard outer layer called the exine is made up of Vacuoles a,
sporopollenin which is one of the most resistant organic material ‘
known. It can withstand high temperatures and strong acids
and alkali. No enzyme that degrades sporopollenin is so far
known. Pollen grain eXine has prominent apertures called germ
pores where sporopollenin is absent. Pollen grains are well-
preserved as fossils because of the presence of sporopollenin.
’Ihe eXine exhibits a fascinating array of patterns and designs.
Why do you think the exine should be hard? What is the
junction of germ pore? The inner wall of the pollen grain is Asymmetric
called the intine. It is a thin and continuous layer made up of Splmdle
cellulose and pectin. The cytoplasm of pollen grain is
surrounded by a plasma membrane. When the pollen grain is
mature it contains two cells, the vegetative cell and generative
cell (Figure 2.5b). The vegetative cell is bigger, has abundant
food reserve and a large irregularly shaped nucleus. The
generative cell is small and ﬂoats in the cytoplasm of the
vegetative cell. It is spindle shaped with dense cytoplasm and Figure 2-5 (a) Enlarged View Of
a nucleus. In over 60 per cent of angiosperms, pollen grains a pollen gram tetrad; “0) Stages

of a microspore maturing into a
are shed at this 2-celled stage. In the remaining species, the pollen grain

generative cell divides mitotically to give rise to the two male
gametes before pollen grains are shed (3-celled stage).
Pollen grains of many species cause severe allergies and bronchial —

afﬂictions in some people often leading to chronic respiratory
disorders— asthma, bronchitis, etc. It may be mentioned that Parthenium
or carrot grass that came into India as a contaminant with imported wheat,
has become ubiquitous in occurrence and causes pollen allergy.

 

 

2019-2020