TRANSPORT IN PLANTS 187

rates, up to l 5 metres per hour. How is this movement accomplished? A
long standing question is, whether water is ‘pushed’ or ‘pulled’ through
the plant. Most researchers agree that water is mainly ‘pulled’ through
the plant, and that the driving force for this process is transpiration from
the leaves. This is referred to as the cohesion-tension-transpiration
pull model of water transport. But, what generates this transpirational pull?

Water is transient in plants. Less than 1 per cent of the water reaching
the leaves is used in photosynthesis and plant growth. Most of it is lost
through the stomata in the leaves. This water loss is known as
transpiration.

You have studied transpiration in an earlier class by enclosing a healthy
plant in polythene bag and observing the droplets of water formed inside
the bag. You could also study water loss from a leaf using cobalt chloride
paper, which turns colour on absorbing water.

1 1 .4 TRANSPIRATION

Transpiration is the evaporative loss of water by plants. It occurs mainly
through stomata (sing. : stoma). Besides the loss of water vapour in
transpiration, exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the leaf also occurs
through these stomata. Normally stomata are open in the day time and
close during the night. The immediate cause of the opening or closing of
stomata is a change in the turgidity of the guard cells. The inner wall of
each guard cell, towards the pore or stomatal aperture, is thick and elastic.
When turgidity increases within the two guard cells ﬂanking each stomatal
aperture or pore, the thin outer walls bulge out and force the inner walls
into a crescent shape. The opening of the stoma is also aided due to the
orientation of the microfibrils in the cell walls of the guard cells. Cellulose
rnicrofibrils are oriented radially rather than longitudinally making it easier
for the stoma to open. When the guard cells lose turgor, due to water loss
(or water stress) the elastic inner walls regain their original shape, the guard
cells become ﬂaccid and the stoma closes.

Usually the lower surface of a dorsiventral (often dicotyledonous) leaf
has a greater number of stomata while in
an isobilateral (often monocotyledonous)
leaf they are about equal on both surfaces.
Transpiration is affected by several
external factors: temperature, light, MiCFOﬁbn'lS
humidity, wind speed. Plant factors that Guard cell
affect transpiration include number and
distribution of stomata, per cent of open
stomata, water status of the plant, canopy
structure etc.

Stomatal
aperture

 

Figure11.8 A stomatal aperture with guard cells

2019-2020