HUMAN REPRODUCTION

gonadotropins (LH and FSH) increases gradually during the follicular
phase, and stimulates follicular development as well as secretion of
estrogens by the growing follicles. Both LH and FSH attain a peak level
in the middle of cycle (about 14th day). Rapid secretion of LH leading to
its maximum level during the mid-cycle called LH surge induces rupture
of Graaﬁan follicle and thereby the release of ovum (ovulation). The
ovulation (ovulatory phase) is followed by the luteal phase during which
the remaining parts of the Graafian follicle transform as the corpus
luteum (Figure 3.9). The corpus luteum secretes large amounts of
progesterone which is essential for maintenance of the endometrium.
Such an endometrium is necessary for implantation of the fertilised
ovum and other events of pregnancy. During pregnancy all events of
the menstrual cycle stop and there is no menstruation. In the absence
of fertilisation, the corpus luteum degenerates. This causes disintegration
of the endometrium leading to menstruation, marking a new cycle. In
human beings, menstrual cycles ceases around 50 years of age; that is
termed as menopause. Cyclic menstruation is an indicator of normal
reproductive phase and extends between menarche and menopause.

3.5 FERTILISATION AND IMPLANTATION

During copulation (coitus) semen is released by the penis into the vagina
(insemination). The motile sperms swim rapidly, pass through the cervix,
enter into the uterus and finally reach the ampullary region of the
fallopian tube (Figure 3.1 lb). The ovum released by the ovary is also
transported to the ampullary region
where fertilisation takes place.
Fertilisation can only occur if the
ovum and sperms are transported
simultaneously to the ampullary
region. This is the reason why not all
copulations lead to fertilisation and
pregnancy.

The process of fusion of a sperm
with an ovum is called fertilisation.
During fertilisation, a sperm comes in
contact with the zona pellucida layer
of the ovum Wigure 3. 10) and induces
changes in the membrane that block
the entry of additional sperms. Thus,
it ensures that only one sperm can
fertilise an ovum. The secretions of the
acrosome help the sperm enter into the
cytoplasm of the ovum through the PeriVitelline Space
zona pellucida and the plasma

Zona
pellucida

    
 

\(‘C

Menstrual Hygiene

 

Maintenance of
hygiene and sanitation
during menstruation is
very important. Take
bath and clean yourself
regulary. Use sanitary
napkins or clean
homemade pads.
Change sanitary
napkins or homemade
pads after every 4—5 hrs
as per the requirement.
Dispose of the used
sanitary napkins
properly wrapping it
with a used paper. Do
not throw the used
napkins in the
drainpipe of toilets or
in the open area. After
handling the napkin
wash hands with soap.

Cells of the
corona radiata

 

Figure 3.10 Ovum surrounded by few sperms

2019-2020