96

 

BIOLOGY

6.4.1.3 Spring wood and autumn wood

The activity of cambium is under the control of many physiological and
environmental factors. In temperate regions, the climatic conditions are
not uniform through the year. In the spring season, cambium is very
active and produces a large number of xylary elements having vessels
with wider cavities. The wood formed during this season is called spring
wood or early wood. In winter, the cambium is less active and forms
fewer xylary elements that have narrow vessels, and this wood is called
autumn wood or late wood.

The spring wood is lighter in colour and has a lower density whereas
the autumn wood is darker and has a higher density. The two kinds of
woods that appear as alternate concentric rings, constitute an annual ring.
Annual rings seen in a cut stem give an estimate of the age of the tree.

6.4.1.4 Heartwood and sapwood

In old trees, the greater part of secondary xylem is dark brown due to
deposition of organic compounds like tannins, resins, oils, gums, aromatic
substances and essential oils in the central or innermost layers of the stem.
These substances make it hard, durable and resistant to the attacks of micro-
organisms and insects. This region comprises dead elements with highly
ligniﬁed walls and is called heartwood. The heartwood does not conduct
water but it gives mechanical support to the stem. The peripheral region of
the secondary xylem, is lighter in colour and is known as the sapwood. It is
involved in the conduction of water and minerals from root to leaf.

6.4.2 Cork Cambium

As the stem continues to increase in girth due to the activity of vascular
cambium, the outer cortical and epidermis layers get broken and need to
be replaced to provide new protective cell layers. Hence, sooner or later,
another meristematic tissue called cork cambium or phellogen develops,
usually in the cortex region. Phellogen is a couple of layers thick. It is
made of narrow, thin-walled and nearly rectangular cells. Phellogen cuts
off cells on both sides. The outer cells differentiate into cork or phellem
while the inner cells differentiate into secondary cortex or phelloderm.
The cork is impervious to water due to suberin deposition in the cell wall.
The cells of secondary cortex are parenchymatous. Phellogen, phellem,
and phelloderm are collectively known as periderm. Due to activity of
the cork cambium, pressure builds up on the remaining layers peripheral