MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

 

In some viruses the ﬂow of information is in reverse direction, that is,
from RNA to DNA. Can you suggest a simple name to the process?

6. 1.2 Packaging of DNA Helix

Taken the distance between two consecutive base pairs
as 0.34 nm (0.34X 10‘9 m), if the length of DNA double DNA H1 histone
helix in a typical mammalian cell is calculated (simply
by multiplying the total number of bp with distance
between two consecutive bp, that is, 6.6 X 109 bp X
0.34 X 10‘9 m/ bp), it comes out to be approximately ,7
2.2 metres. A length that is far greater than the ' octamer
dimension of a typical nucleus (approximately 1W m).
How is such a long polymer packaged in a cell?

If the length of E. coli DNA is 1.36 rmn, can you
calculate the number of base pairs in E.coli?

    

Core of histone molecules
In prokaryotes, such as, E. coli, though they do

not have a deﬁned nucleus, the DNA is not scattered Figure 6-43 NUC16030me
throughout the cell. DNA (being negatively charged)
is held with some proteins (that have positive
charges) in a region termed as ‘nucleoid’. The DNA
in nucleoid is organised in large loops held by
proteins.

In eukaryotes, this organisation is much more
complex. There is a set of positively charged, basic
proteins called histones. A protein acquires charge
depending upon the abundance of amino acids
residues with charged side chains. Histones are rich
in the basic amino acid residues lysine and arginine. . _, . _ _ .
Both the amino acid residues carry positive charges Figure 6. 4b EM picture _ ‘Beads-on-String’
in their side chains. Histones are organised to form
a unit of eight molecules called histone octamer.

The negatively charged DNA is wrapped around the positively charged
histone octamer to form a structure called nucleosome (Figure 6.4 a). A
typical nucleosome contains 200 bp of DNA helix. Nucleosomes constitute
the repeating unit of a structure in nucleus called chromatin, thread-
like stained (coloured) bodies seen in nucleus. The nucleosomes in
chromatin are seen as ‘beads-on-string’ structure when viewed under

electron microscope (EM) (Figure 6.4 b).
Theoretically, how many such beads (nucleosomes) do you imagine
—

are present in a mammalian cell?

The beads-on-string structure in chromatin is packaged to form
chromatin ﬁbers that are further coiled and condensed at metaphase stage
of cell division to form chromosomes. The packaging of chromatin at higher
level requires additional set of proteins that collectively are referred to as

 

2019—2020