BIOLOGY

contact with the infected persons or their belongings should be avoided.
For diseases such as malaria and filariasis that are transmitted through
insect vectors, the most important measure is to control or eliminate the
vectors and their breeding places. This can be achieved by avoiding
stagnation of water in and around residential areas, regular cleaning of
household coolers, use of mosquito nets, introducing ﬁshes like Gambusia
in ponds that feed on mosquito larvae, spraying of insecticides in ditches,
drainage areas and swamps, etc. In addition, doors and windows should
be provided with wire mesh to prevent the entry of mosquitoes. Such
precautions have become more important especially in the light of recent
widespread incidences of the vector-borne (Aedes mosquitoes) diseases
like dengue and chikungunya in many parts of India.

The advancements made in biological science have armed us to
effectively deal with many infectious diseases. The use of vaccines and
immunisation programmes have enabled us to completely eradicate a
deadly disease like smallpox. A large number of other infectious diseases
like polio, diphtheria, pneumonia and tetanus have been controlled to a
large extent by the use of vaccines. Biotechnology (about which you will
read more in Chapter 12) is at the verge of making available newer and
safer vaccines. Discovery of antibiotics and various other drugs has also
enabled us to effectively treat infectious diseases.

8.2 IMMUNITY

Everyday we are exposed to large number of infectious agents. However,
only a few of these exposures result in disease. Why? This is due to the
fact that the body is able to defend itself from most of these foreign agents.
This overall ability of the host to ﬁght the disease-causing organisms,
conferred by the immune system is called immunity.

Immunity is of two types: (i) Innate immunity and (ii) Acquired
immunity.

8.2. 1 Innate Immunity

Innate immunity is non-specific type of defence, that is present at the
time of birth. This is accomplished by providing different types of barriers
to the entry of the foreign agents into our body. Innate immunity consist
of four types of barriers. These are —

(i) Physical barriers : Skin on our body is the main barrier which
prevents entry of the micro-organisms. Mucus coating of the
epithelium lining the respiratory, gastrointestinal and urogenital
tracts also help in trapping microbes entering our body.

(ii) Physiological barriers : Acid in the stomach, saliva in the mouth,
tears from eyes—all prevent microbial growth.

(iii) Cellular barriers : Certain types of leukocytes (WBC) of our body
like polymorpho-nuclear leukocytes (PMNL—neutrophils) and

2019—2020