PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

embryos are some of the reasons which causes seed dormancy. This dormancy
however can be overcome through natural means and various other man-made
measures. For example, the seed coat barrier in some seeds can be broken by
mechanical abrasions using knives, sandpaper, etc. or vigorous shaking. In nature,
these abrasions are caused by microbial action, and passage through digestive
tract of animals. Effect of inhibitory substances can be removed by subjecting the
seeds to chilling conditions or by application of certain chemicals like gibberellic
acid and nitrates. Changing the environmental conditions, such as light and
temperature are other methods to overcome seed dormancy.

SUMMARY

Growth is one of the most conspicuous events in any living organism. It is an
irreversible increase expressed in parameters such as size, area, length, height,
volume, cell number etc. It conspicuously involves increased protoplasmic material.
In plants, meristems are the sites of growth. Root and shoot apical meristems
sometimes alongwith intercalary meristem, contribute to the elongation growth of
plant axes. Growth 1s indeterminate 1n higher plants. Following cell division 1n root
and shoot apical meristem cells, the gmwth cOuld be arithmetic or geometrical.
Growth may not be and generally ismot sustémed at a 1:11gh rate throughout the life
of cell / t1ssue / organ / organlsm =10 e-.can deﬁne threepnnclple phases of growth —
the lag, the log and the senescgnk .\ hase When a Cé loSes the capacity to divide, it
leads to differentiation D1fferei’1gtiatlon result I devebopment of structures that 1s
commensurate with thye£1111ction the cells ﬁnally has to perform. General principles
for differentiation forfc l tissues and organsl‘are similar. A differentiated cell may
dedifferentiate and thénTedifferentiaZt "“S1nce differentiation 1n plants 1s open, the
development could also be ﬂex1ble§ 11:e’.;rt1’1e development IS the sum of growth and
differentiation. Plant exhibit plasticny 1n development.

Plant growth and development are under the control of both intrinsic and
extrinsic factors. Intercellular‘intrmsw factors are the chemical substances, called
plant growth regulators (PGR) There are diverse groups of PGRs 1n plants, principally
belonging to ﬁve groups. auxms, gibberellins, cytokinins, abscisic acid and ethylene.
These PGRs are synthesised in various parts of the plant; they control different
differentiation and developmental events. Any PGR has diverse physiological effects
on plants. Diverse PGRs also manifest similar effects. PGRs may act synergistically
or antagonistically. Plant growth and development is also affected by light,
temperature, nutrition, oxygen status, gravity and such external factors.

Flowering in some plants is induced only when exposed to certain duration of
photoperiod. Depending on the nature of photoperiod requirements, the plants are
called short day plants, long day plants and day-neutral plants. Certain plants
also need to be exposed to low temperature so as to hasten ﬂowering later in life.
This treatement is known as vernalisation.

 

 

 

   

    

253