TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

Let us discuss another experiment where a
solution of sucrose in water taken in a funnel is
separated from pure water in a beaker by a
selectively permeable membrane (Figure 1 1.4).
You can get this kind of a membrane in an egg.
Remove the yolk and albumin through a small
hole at one end of the egg, and place the shell
in dilute solution of hydrochloric acid for a few
hours. The egg shell dissolves leaving the
membrane intact. Water will move into the funnel,
resulting in rise in the level of the solution in the
funnel. This will continue till the equilibrium is
reached. In case sucrose does diffuse out
through the membrane, will this equilibrium be
ever reached?

External pressure can be applied from the
upper part of the funnel such that no water
diffuses into the funnel through the membrane.
This pressure required to prevent water from
diffusing is in fact, the osmotic pressure and this
is the function of the solute concentration; more
the solute concentration, greater will be the
pressure required to prevent water from diffusing
in. Numerically osmotic pressure is equivalent
to the osmotic potential, but the sign is
opposite.Osmotic pressure is the positive
pressure applied, while osmotic potential is
negative.

1 1 .2 .3 Plasmolysis

The behaviour of the plant cells (or tissues) with
regard to water movement depends on the
surrounding solution. If the external solution
balances the osmotic pressure of the cytoplasm,
it is said to be isotonic. If the external solution
is more dilute than the cytoplasm, it is
hypotonic and if the external solution is more
concentrated, it is hypertonic. Cells swell in
hypotonic solutions and shrink in hypertonic
ones.

Plasmolysis occurs when water moves out of
the cell and the cell membrane of a plant cell
shrinks away from its cell wall. This occurs when

181

Pressure

1

 

Figure 11.4 A demonstration of osmosis. A
thistle funnel is filled with
sucrose solution and kept
inverted in a beaker containing
water. (a) Water will diffuse
across the membrane (as
shown by arrows) to raise the
level of the solution in the
funnel (b) Pressure can be
applied as shown to stop the
water movement into the
funnel