NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION

cortex area of the brain, where the neural impulses are analysed and the
image formed on the retina is recognised based on earlier memory and
experience.

21.6.2 The Ear

’Ihe ears perform two sensory functions, hearing and maintenance of body
balance. Anatomically, the ear can be divided into three major sections
called the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear (Figure 2 1.7). The
outer ear consists of the

pinna and external _ Temporal bone

auditory meatus (canal). “
The pinna collects the
vibrations in the air which
produce sound. The
external auditory meatus
leads inwards and extends
up to the tympanic

nerve

membrane (the ear drum).
There are very ﬁne hairs and Cochlea
wax-secretin lands in the '

. g.g External ’I‘ympamc
sk1n of the pinna and the . membrane

, auditory Eustachian

meatus. The tympanic canal tube
membrane is composed of
connective tissues covered Figure 21.7 Diagrammatic view of ear

with skin outside and with

mucus membrane inside.

The middle ear contains three ossicles called malleus, incus and stapes
which are attached to one another in a chain-like fashion. The malleus is
attached to the tympanic membrane and the stapes is attached to the
oval window of the cochlea. The ear ossicles increase the efﬁciency of
transmission of sound waves to the inner ear. An Eustachian tube
connects the middle ear cavity with the pharynx. The Eustachian tube
helps in equalising the pressures on either sides of the ear drum.

The ﬂuid-ﬁlled inner ear called labyrinth consists of two parts, the
bony and the membranous labyrinths. The bony labyrinth is a series of
channels. Inside these channels lies the membranous labyrinth, which is
surrounded by a ﬂuid called perilymph. The membranous labyrinth is
ﬁlled with a ﬂuid called endolymph. The coiled portion of the labyrinth is
called cochlea. The membranes constituting cochlea, the reissner’s and
basilar, divide the surounding perilymph ﬁlled bony labyrinth into an
upper scala vestibuli and a lower scala tympani (Figure 2 1.8). The space

325