BIOLOGY

16.4. 1 Case Study of Organic Farming

Integrated organic farming is a cyclical, zero-waste procedure, where waste
products from one process are cycled in as nutrients for other processes.
This allows the maximum utilisation of resource and increases the
efﬁciency of production. Ramesh Chandra Dagar, a farmer in Sonipat,
Haryana, is doing j ust this. He includes bee-keeping, dairy management,
water harvesting, composting and agriculture in a chain of processes,
which support each other and allow an extremely economical and
sustainable venture. There is no need to use chemical fertilisers for crops,
as cattle excreta (dung) are used as manure. Crop waste is used to create
compost, which can be used as a natural fertiliser or can be used to
generate natural gas for satisfying the energy needs of the farm.
Enthusiastic about spreading information and help on the practice of
integrated organic farming, Dagar has created the Haryana Kisan Welfare
Club, with a current membership of 5000 farmers.

16.5 RADIOACTIVE WASTES

Initially, nuclear energy was hailed as a non-polluting way for generating
electricity. Later on, it was realised that the use of nuclear energy has two
very serious inherent problems. The ﬁrst is accidental leakage, as occurred
in the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl incidents and the second is safe
disposal of radioactive wastes.

Radiation, that is given off by nuclear waste is extremely damaging to
organisms, because it causes mutations at a very high rate. At high doses,
nuclear radiation is lethal but at lower doses, it creates various disorders,
the most frequent of all being cancer. Therefore, nuclear waste is an
extremely potent pollutant and has to be dealt with utmost caution.

It has been recommended that storage of nuclear waste, after
sufficient pre-treatment, should be done in suitably shielded
containers buried within the rocks, about 500 m deep below the
earth’s surface. However, this method of disposal is meeting stiff
opposition from the public. Why do you think this method of
disposal is not agreeable to many people?

16.6 GREENHOUSE EFFECT AND GLOBAL WARMING

The term ‘Greenhouse effect’ has been derived from a phenomenon that
occurs in a greenhouse. Have you ever seen a greenhouse? It looks like a
small glass house and is used for growing plants especially during winter.
In a greenhouse the glass panel lets the light in, but does not allow heat
to escape. Therefore, the greenhouse warms up, very much like inside a
car that has been parked in the sun for a few hours.

The greenhouse effect is a naturally occurring phenomenon that is
responsible for heating of Earth’s surface and atmosphere. You would be

2019—2020