/
.3)

The Medical Termination
of Pregnancy
(Amendment) Act, 20 1 7
was enacted by the
govemment of India with
the intension of
reducing the incidence of
illegal abortion and
consequent maternal
mortality and morbidity.
According to this Act, a
pregnancy may be
terminated on certain
considered grounds
within the first 12 weeks
of pregnancy on the
opinion of one registered
medical practitioner. If
the pregnancy has lasted
more than 12 weeks, but
fewer than 24 weeks, two
registered medical
practitioners must be of
the opinion, formed in
good faith, that the
required ground exist.
The grounds for such
termination of
pregnancies are:

(i) The continuation of
the pregnancy would
involve a risk to the
life of the pregnant
woman or of grave
injury physical or
mental health; or

(ii There is a
substantial risk that
of the child were
born, it would suffer
from such physical
or mental
abnormalities as to
be seriously
handicapped.

 

 

BIOLOGY

pregnancies. Surgical intervention blocks gamete transport and thereby
prevent conception. Sterilisation procedure in the male is called ‘vasectomy’
and that in the female, ‘tubectomy’. In vasectomy, a small part of the vas
deferens is removed or tied up through a small incision on the scrotum
(Figure 4.4a) whereas in tubectomy, a small part of the fallopian tube is
removed (Figure 4.4b) or tied up through a small incision in the abdomen
or through vagina. These techniques are highly effective but their
reversibility is very poor.

It needs to be emphasised that the selection of a suitable contraceptive
method and its use should always be undertaken in consultation with
qualified medical professionals. One must also remember that
contraceptives are not regular requirements for the maintenance of
reproductive health. In fact, they are practiced against a natural
reproductive event, i.e., conception / pregnancy. One is forced to use these
methods either to prevent pregnancy or to delay or space pregnancy due
to personal reasons. No doubt, the widespread use of these methods have
a signiﬁcant role in checking uncontrolled growth of population. However,
their possible ill-effects like nausea, abdominal pain, breakthrough
bleeding, irregular menstrual bleeding or even breast cancer, though not
very significant, should not be totally ignored.

4.3 MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY (MTP)

Intentional or voluntary termination of pregnancy before full term is called
medical termination of pregnancy (MTP) or induced abortion. Nearly
45 to 50 million MTPs are performed in a year all over the world which
accounts to 1 / 5th of the total number of conceived pregnancies in a year.
Whether to accept / legalise MTP or not is being debated upon in many
countries due to emotional, ethical, religious and social issues involved
in it. Government of India legalised MTP in 197 1 with some strict conditions
to avoid its misuse. Such restrictions are all the more important to check
indiscriminate and illegal female foeticides which are reported to be high
in India.

Why MTP ? Obviously the answer is—to get rid of unwanted
pregnancies either due to casual unprotected intercourse or failure of the
contraceptive used during coitus or rapes. MTPs are also essential in
certain cases where continuation of the pregnancy could be harmful or
even fatal either to the mother or to the foetus or both.

MTPs are considered relatively safe during the ﬁrst trimester, i.e., upto
12 weeks of pregnancy. Second trimester abortions are much more riskier.
One disturbing trend observed is that a majority of the MIPS are performed
illegally by unqualiﬁed quacks which are not only unsafe but could be
fatal too. Another dangerous trend is the misuse of amniocentesis to
determine the sex of the unborn child. Frequently, if the foetus is found
to be female, it is followed by MTP- this is totally against what is legal.

2019-2020