BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS

disease. These are specially made to serve as models for human
diseases so that investigation of new treatments for diseases is made
possible. Today transgenic models exist for many human diseases
such as cancer, cystic ﬁbrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s.

(iii) Biological products: Medicines required to treat certain human
diseases can contain biological products, but such products are
often expensive to make. Transgenic animals that produce useful
biological products can be created by the introduction of the portion
of DNA (or genes) which codes for a particular product such as
human protein (0c- 1 -antitrypsin) used to treat emphysema. Similar
attempts are being made for treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU)
and cystic ﬁbrosis. In 1997, the ﬁrst transgenic cow, Rosie, produced
human protein-enriched milk (2.4 grams per litre). The milk
contained the human alpha-lactalbumin and was nutritionally a
more balanced product for human babies than natural cow-milk.

(iv) Vaccine safety: Transgenic mice are being developed for use in
testing the safety of vaccines before they are used on humans.
Transgenic mice are being used to test the safety of the polio vaccine.
If successful and found to be reliable, they could replace the use of
monkeys to test the safety of batches of the vaccine.

(v) Chemical safety testing: This is known as toxicity/ safety testing.
The procedure is the same as that used for testing tom'city of drugs.
Transgenic animals are made that carry genes which make them more
sensitive to tom'c substances than non-transgenic animals. They are

then exposed to the toxic substances and the effects studied. Toxicity
testing in such animals will allow us to obtain results in less time.

12.4 ETHICAL ISSUES

The manipulation of living organisms by the human race cannot go on
any further, without regulation. Some ethical standards are required to
evaluate the morality of all human activities that might help or harm living
organisms.

Going beyond the morality of such issues, the biological signiﬁcance
of such things is also important. Genetic modiﬁcation of organisms can
have unpredicatable results when such organisms are introduced into
the ecosystem.

Therefore, the Indian Government has set up organisations such as
GEAC (Genetic Engineering Approval Committee), which will make
decisions regarding the validity of GM research and the safety of
introducing GM-organisms for public services.

The modiﬁcation / usage of living organisms for public services (as food
and medicine sources, for example) has also created problems with patents
granted for the same.

213

 

2019—2020