120

 

BIOLOGY

from the ovaries opens into the cloaca separately. A mature female can
lay 2500 to 3000 ova at a time. Fertilisation is external and takes place in
water. Development involves a larval stage called tadpole. Tadpole
undergoes metamorphosis to form the adult.

Frogs are beneﬁcial for mankind because they eat insects and protect
the crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance because these serve as an
important link of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. In some
countries the muscular legs of frog are used as food by man.

SUMMARY

Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems split up the work in a way that ensures
the survival of the body as a whole and exhibit division of labour. A tissue is
deﬁned as group of cells along with intercellular substances performing one or
more functions in the body. Epithelia are sheet like tissues lining the body’s surface
and its cavities, ducts and tubes. Epithelia have one free surface facing a body
ﬂuid or the outside environment. Their cells are structurally and functionally
connected at junctions.

Diverse types of connective tissues bind together, support, strengthen, protect,
and insulate other tissue in the body. Soft connective tissues consist of protein
ﬁbres as well as a variety of cells arranged in a ground substance. Cartilage, bone,
blood, and adipose tissue are specialised connective tissues. Cartilage and bone
are both structural materials. Blood is a ﬂuid tissue with transport functions.
Adipose tissue is a reservoir of stored energy. Muscle tissue, which can contract
(shorten) in response to stimulation, helps in movement of the body and speciﬁc
body parts. Skeletal muscle is the muscle tissue attached to bones. Smooth muscle
is a component of internal organs. Cardiac muscle makes up the contractile walls
of the heart. Connective tissue covers all three types of tissues. Nervous tissue
exerts greatest control over the response of body. Neurons are the basic units of
nervous tissue.

Earthworm, Cockroach and Frog show characteristic features in body
organisation. In Pheretima posthuma (earthworm), the body is covered by cuticle.
All segments of its body are alike except the 14m, 1 5‘11 and 1 6‘11 segment, which are
thick and dark and glandular, forming clitellum. A ring of S-shaped chitinous
setae is found in each segment. These setae help in locomotion. On the ventral
side spermathecal openings are present in between the grooves of 5 and 6, 6 and
7, 7 and 8 and 8 and 9 segments. Female genital pores are present on 14th segment
and male genital pores on 18th segment. The alimentary canal is a narrow tube
made of mouth, buccal cavity, pharynx, gizzard, stomach, intestine and anus.
The blood vascular system is of closed type with heart and valves. Nervous system
is represented by ventral nerve cord. Earthworm is hermaphorodite. Two pairs of