MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

phosphate moiety at 5,-end of sugar, which is referred to as 5’-end of
polynucleotide chain. Similarly, at the other end of the polymer the sugar
has a free OH of 3C group which is referred to as 3’ - end of the
polynucleotide chain. The backbone of a polynucleotide chain is formed
due to sugar and phosphates. The nitrogenous bases linked to sugar
moiety project from the backbone (Figure 6.1).

In RNA, every nucleotide residue has an additional —OH group present
at 2,-position in the ribose. Also, in RNA the uracil is found at the place of
thymine (5-methyl uracil, another chemical name for thymine).

DNA as an acidic substance present in nucleus was ﬁrst identiﬁed by
Friedrich Meischer in 1 869. He named it as ‘Nuclein’. However, due to
technical limitation in isolating such a long polymer intact, the elucidation
of structure of DNA remained elusive for a very long period of time. It was
only in 1953 that James Watson and Francis Crick, based on the X—ray
diffraction data produced by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin,
proposed a very simple but famous Double Helix model for the structure
of DNA One of the hallmarks of their proposition was base pairing between
the two strands of polynucleotide chains. However, this proposition was
also based on the observation of Erwin Chargaff that for a double stranded
DNA, the ratios between Adenine and Thymine and Guanine and Cytosine
are constant and equals one.

The base pairing confers a very unique property to the polynucleotide
chains. They are said to be complementary to each other, and therefore if
the sequence of bases in one strand is known then the sequence in other
strand can be predicted. Also, if each strand from a DNA (let us call it as a
parental DNA) acts as a template for synthesis of a new strand, the two
double stranded DNA (let us call them as daughter DNA) thus, produced
would be identical to the parental DNA molecule. Because of this, the genetic
implications of the structure of DNA became very clear.

The salient features of the Double-helix structure of DNA are as follows:
(i) It is made of two polynucleotide chains, where the backbone is
constituted by sugar-phosphate, and the bases project inside.
(ii) The two chains have anti-parallel polarity. It means, if one
chain has the polarity 593', the other has 395'.

(iii) The bases in two strands are paired through hydrogen bond
(H-bonds) forming base pairs (bp). Adenine forms two hydrogen
bonds with Thymine from opposite strand and Vice-versa.
Similarly, Guanine is bonded with Cytosine with three H-bonds.
As a result, always a purine comes opposite to a pyrimidine. This
generates approximately uniform distance between the two
strands of the helix (Figure 6.2).

(iv) The two chains are coiled in a right-handed fashion. The pitch
of the helix is 3.4 nm (a nanometre is one billionth of a
metre, that is 10“9 m) and there are roughly 10 bp in each

2019-2020

 

97