174

 

BIOLOGY

for resistance sources, hybridisation of selected parents, selection and
evaluation of the hybrids and testing and release of new varieties.

Some crop varieties bred by hybridisation and selection, for
disease resistance to fungi, bacteria and viral diseases are released
(Table 9.1).

Table 9. 1
Crop Variety Resistance to diseases
Wheat Himgiri Leaf and stripe rust, hill bunt

(Karan rai)

Cauliﬂower Pusa Shubhra, Black rot and Curl

Brassica Pusa swarnim White rust l
Pusa Snowball K—1 blight black rot |

Cowpea Pusa Komal Bacterial blight

Chilli Pusa Sadabahar Chilly mosaic virus,
Tobacco mosaic virus
and Leaf curl

 

Conventional breeding is often constrained by the availability of limited
number of disease resistance genes that are present and identiﬁed in various
crop varieties or wild relatives. Inducing mutations in plants through diverse
means and then screening the plant materials for resistance sometimes
leads to desirable genes being identiﬁed. Plants having these desirable
characters can then be either multiplied directly or can be used in breeding.
Other breeding methods that are used are selection amongst somaclonal
variants and genetic engineering.

Mutation is the process by which genetic variations are created
through changes in the base sequence within genes (see Chapter 5)
resulting in the creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental
type. It is possible to induce mutations artiﬁcially through use of chemicals
or radiations (like gamma radiations), and selecting and using the plants
that have the desirable character as a source in breeding — this process is
called mutation breeding. In mung bean, resistance to yellow mosaic
virus and powdery mildew were induced by mutations.

Several wild relatives of different cultivated species of plants have been
shown to have certain resistant characters but have very low yield. Hence,
there is a need to introduce the resistant genes into the high-yielding
cultivated varieties. Resistance to yellow mosaic Virus in bhindi
(Abelmoschus esculentus) was transferred from a wild species and
resulted in a new variety of A. esculentus called Parbhani kranti.

2019-2020