EVOLUTION

frequencies, for example, can be named p, q, etc. In a diploid, p and q
represent the frequency of allele A and allele a. The frequency of AA
individuals in a population is simply p2. This is simply stated in another
ways, i.e., the probability that an allele Awith a frequency of p appear on
both the chromosomes of a diploid individual is simply the product
of the probabilities, i.e., p2. Similarly of aa is q2, of Aa 2pq. Hence,
p2+2pq+q2=1. This is a binomial expansion of (p+q)2. When frequency
measured, differs from expected values, the difference (direction) indicates
the extent of evolutionary change. Disturbance in genetic equilibrium, or
Hardy— Weinberg equilibrium, i.e., change of frequency of alleles in a
population would then be interpreted as resulting in evolution.

Five factors are known to affect Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. These
are gene migration or gene ﬂow, genetic drift, mutation, genetic
recombination and natural selection. When migration of a section of
population to another place and population occurs, gene frequencies
change in the original as well as in the new population. New genes / alleles
are added to the new population and these are lost from the old population.
There would be a gene ﬂow if this gene migration, happens multiple times.
If the same change occurs by chance, it is called genetic drift. Sometimes
the change in allele frequency is so different in the new sample of population
that they become a different species. The original drifted population
becomes founders and the effect is called founder effect.

Microbial experiments show that pre-existing advantageous
mutations when selected will result in observation of new phenotypes.
Over few generations, this would result in Speciation. Natural selection is
a process in which heritable variations enabling better survival are enabled
to reproduce and leave greater number of progeny. A critical analysis
makes us believe that variation due to mutation or variation due to
recombination during gametogenesis, or due to gene ﬂow or genetic drift
results in changed frequency of genes and alleles in future generation.
Coupled to enhance reproductive success, natural selection makes it look
like different population. Natural selection can lead to stabilisation (in
which more individuals acquire mean character value), directional change
(more individuals acquire value other than the mean character value) or
disruption (more individuals acquire peripheral character value at both
ends of the distribution curve) (Figure 7.8).

7.8 A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF EVOLUTION

About 2000 million years ago (mya) the ﬁrst cellular forms of life appeared
on earth. The mechanism of how non-cellular aggregates of giant
macromolecules could evolve into cells with membranous envelop is not
known. Some of these cells had the ability to release 02. The reaction

2019-2020

 

137