PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

Table 5.1: Contrasting Traits Studied by
Mendel in Pea

|.S No. Characters Contrasting Traits I

Stem height Tall/ dwarf
I12. Flower oolour Violet/ white

I
I
I3. Flower position Axial/temtinal I
I4. Pod shape Inﬂated/ constricted I
I 5. Pod colour Green/ yellow I
I 6. Seed shape Round/ wrinkled I

I 7. Seed colour Yellow / green I

5.2 INHERITANCE OF ONE GENE

Let us take the example of one such
hybridisation experiment carried out by
Mendel where he crossed tall and dwarf pea
plants to study the inheritance of one gene
(Figure 5.2). He collected the seeds produced
as a result of this cross and grew them to
generate plants of the ﬁrst hybrid generation.
This generation is also called the Filial1
progeny or the F1. Mendel observed that all
the F1 progeny plants were tall, like one of
its parents; none were dwarf (Figure 5.3). He
made similar observations for the other pairs
of traits — he found that the F1 always
resembled either one of the parents, and that

the trait of the other parent was not seen in ‘» 6

them.

Mendel then self-pollinated the tall F1
plants and to his surprise found that in the
Filial2 generation some of the offspring were
‘dwarf’; the character that was not seen in
the F1 generation was now expressed. The
proportion of plants that were dwarf were

   
    

Transfer of pollen

*’ \ (Pollination)

Petal

Stigma
Anther

Stamen

Carpel

Removal of anthers
(Emasculation)

 

 

Figure 5.2 Steps in making a cross in pea

1 /4th of the F2 plants while 3 / 4m of the F2 plants were tall. The tall and
dwarf traits were identical to their parental type and did not show any
blending, that is all the offspring were either tall or dwarf, none were of in-

between height (Figure 5.3).

Similar results were obtained with the other traits that he studied:
only one of the parental traits was expressed in the F1 generation while at
the F2 stage both the traits were expressed in the proportion 3: 1. The
contrasting traits did not show any blending at either F1 or F2 stage.

2019—2020

 

—