250

 

BIOLOGY

leaves, chloroplasts in leaves, lateral shoot growth and adventitious shoot
formation. Cytokinins help overcome the apical dominance. They promote
nutrient mobilisation which helps in the delay of leaf senescence.

1 5.4.3.4 Ethylene

Ethylene is a simple gaseous PGR. It is synthesised in large amounts
by tissues undergoing senescence and ripening fruits. Inﬂuences of
ethylene on plants include horizontal growth of seedlings, swelling of
the axis and apical hook formation in dicot seedlings. Ethylene promotes
senescence and abscission of plant organs especially of leaves and
ﬂowers. Ethylene is highly effective in fruit ripening. It enhances the
respiration rate during ripening of the fruits. This rise in rate of
respiration is called respiratory climactic.

Ethylene breaks seed and bud dormancy, initiates germination in
peanut seeds, sprouting of potato tubers. Ethylene promotes rapid
internode / petiole elongation in deep water rice plants. It helps leaves /
upper parts of the shoot to remain above water. Ethylene also promotes
root growth and root hair formation, thus helping the plants to increase
their absorption surface.

Ethylene is used to initiate ﬂowering and for synchronising fruit-set
in pineapples. It also induces ﬂowering in mango. Since ethylene regulates
so many physiological processes, it is one of the most widely used PGR in
agriculture. The most widely used compound as source of ethylene is
ethephon. Ethephon in an aqueous solution is readily absorbed and
transported within the plant and releases ethylene slowly. Ethephon
hastens fruit ripening in tomatoes and apples and accelerates abscission
in ﬂowers and fruits (thinning of cotton, cherry, walnut). It promotes female
ﬂowers in cucumbers thereby increasing the yield.

1 5.4.3.5 Abscisic acid

As mentioned earlier, abscisic acid (ABA) was discovered for its role in
regulating abscission and dormancy. But like other PGRs, it also has
other wide ranging effects on plant growth and development. It acts as a
general plant growth inhibitor and an inhibitor of plant metabolism.
ABA inhibits seed germination. ABA stimulates the closure of stomata
and increases the tolerance of plants to various kinds of stresses.
Therefore, it is also called the stress hormone. ABA plays an important
role in seed development, maturation and dormancy. By inducing
dormancy, ABA helps seeds to withstand desiccation and other factors
unfavourable for growth. In most situations, ABA acts as an antagonist
to GAs.

We may summarise that for any and every phase of growth,
differentiation and development of plants, one or the other PGR has some
role to play. Such roles could be complimentary or antagonistic. These
could be individualistic or synergistic.