BIOMOLECULES 143

In higher classes you Will learn about hOW TABLE 9. 1 A Comparison of Elements Present

to analyse a living tissue sample and identify a in N°n'1iVing and LiVing Matter“
particular organic compound. It will suffice to Element % Weight of

say here that one extracts the compounds, then Earth's crust Human body
subjects the extract to various separation Hydrogen (H) 014 05
techniques till one has separated a compound Carbon (C) 0.03 18.5
from all other compounds. In other words, one oxygen (0) 46.6. 65.0
isolates and puriﬁes a compound. Analytical $311353? ((3) very (lgtle 3:
techniques, when applied to the compound give Sodium (Na) 2: 8 0:2

us an idea of the molecular formula and the Calcium (Ca) 35 1.5
probable structure of the compound. All the Magnesium (Mg) 2.1 0:1
carbon compounds that we get from living Silicon (Si) 27-7 negligible

tissues can be called ‘biomolecules’. However, * Adapted from CNR Rao, Understanding Chemistry,
living organisms have also got inorganic universmes Press’ Hyderabad“

elements and compounds in them. How do we
know this? A slightly different but destructive
experiment has to be done. One weighs a small
amount of a living tissue (say a leaf or liver and
this is called wet weight) and dry it. All the water,
evaporates. The remaining material gives dry
weight. Now if the tissue is fully burnt, all the
carbon compounds are oxidised to gaseous
form (C02, water vapour) and are removed. What
is remaining is called ‘ash’. This ash contains

 

TABLE 9.2 A List of Representative Inorganic
Constituents of Living Tissues

   

Component Formula
Sodium Na+

    
       
 

inorganic elements (like calcium, magnesium POtaSSium K+

etc). Inorganic compounds like sulphate, CalCium Ca”
phosphate, etc., are also seen in the acid-soluble Magnesium Mg“
fraction. Therefore elemental analysis gives Water P120
elemental composition of living tissues in the Compounds NaCl, CaCO3,

    
 

form of hydrogen, oxygen, chlorine, carbon etc.
while analysis for compounds gives an idea of
the kind of organic (Figure 9.1) and inorganic constituents (Table 9.2)
present in living tissues. From a chemistry point of view, one can identify
functional groups like aldehydes, ketones, aromatic compounds, etc. But
from a biological point of view, we shall classify them into amino acids,
nucleotide bases, fatty acids etc.

Amino acids are organic compounds containing an amino group and
an acidic group as substituents on the same carbon i.e., the oc-carbon.
Hence, they are called oc-amino acids. They are substituted methanes. There
are four substituent groups occupying the four valency positions. These
are hydrogen, carboxyl group, amino group and a variable group
designated as R group. Based on the nature of R group there are many
amino acids. However, those which occur in proteins are only of twenty

POZ‘ , soi—