BIOLOGY

You may have realised that normally, unless one cuts the vector and
the source DNA with the same restriction enzyme, the recombinant vector
molecule cannot be created.

Separation and isolation of DNA fragments : The cutting of DNA by
restriction endonucleases results in the fragments of DNA. These fragments
can be separated by a technique known as gel electrophoresis. Since
DNA fragments are negatively charged molecules they can be separated
by forcing them to move towards the anode under an electric ﬁeld through
a medium / matrix. Nowadays the most commonly used matrix is agarose
which is a natural polymer extracted from sea weeds. The DNA fragments
separate (resolve) according to their size through sieving effect provided
by the agarose gel. Hence, the smaller the fragment size, the farther it
moves. Look at the Figure 1 1.3 and guess at which end of the gel the
sample was loaded.

The separated DNA fragments can be

visualised only after staining the DNA

Wells with a compound known as ethidium
i fbghvdAs—\ bromide followed by exposure to UV
Largest Smallest radiation [you cannot see pure DNA

DI

U III] /I//

U III/ /
U IIII

 
  

fragments in the visible light and
without staining). You can see bright
orange coloured bands of DNA in a
ethidium bromide stained gel
exposed to UV light (Figure 1 1.3). The
separated bands of DNA are cut out

Figure 11.3 A typical agarose gel from the agarose gel and extracted
electrophoresis showing from the gel piece. This step is known
migration 0f undigeSted as elution. The DNA fragments

(lane 1) and digested set of
DNA fragments (lane 2 to 4)

purified in this way are used in
constructing recombinant DNA by
joining them with cloning vectors.

1 1.2.2 Cloning Vectors

You know that plasmids and bacteriophages have the ability to replicate
within bacterial cells independent of the control of chromosomal DNA.
Bacteriophages because of their high number per cell, have very high
copy numbers of their genome within the bacterial cells. Some plasmids
may have only one or two copies per cell whereas others may have
1 5- 100 copies per cell. Their numbers can go even higher. If we are able
to link an alien piece of DNA with bacteriophage or plasmid DNA, we can
multiply its numbers equal to the copy number of the plasmid or
bacteriophage. Vectors used at present, are engineered in such a way
that they help easy linking of foreign DNA and selection of recombinants
from non-recombinants.

2019-2020