STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCEMENT IN FOOD PRODUCTION

Plant breeding programmes are carried out in a systematic way

worldwide—in government institutions and commercial companies. The
main steps in breeding a new genetic variety of a crop are —

(i)

(ii)

(in)

(W)

(V)

Collection of variability: Genetic variability is the root of any
breeding programme. In many crops pre-existing genetic variability
is available from wild relatives of the crop. Collection and preservation
of all the different wild varieties, species and relatives of the cultivated
species (followed by their evaluation for their characteristics) is a
pre-requisite for effective exploitation of natural genes available in
the populations. The entire collection (of plants / seeds) having all
the diverse alleles for all genes in a given crop is called germplasm
collection.

Evaluation and selection of parents: The germplasm is evaluated
so as to identify plants with desirable combination of characters.
The selected plants are multiplied and used in the process of
hybridisation. Purelines are created wherever desirable and possible.

Cross hybridisation among the selected parents: The desired
characters have very often to be combined from two different plants
(parents), for example high protein quality of one parent may need
to be combined with disease resistance from another parent. This is
possible by cross hybridising the two parents to produce hybrids
that genetically combine the desired characters in one plant. This is
a very time-consuming and tedious process since the pollen
grains from the desirable plant chosen as male parent have to be
collected and placed on the stigma of the ﬂowers selected as female
parent (In chapter 2 details on how to make crosses have been
described). Also, it is not necessary that the hybrids do combine the
desirable characters; usually only one in few hundred to a thousand
crosses shows the desirable combination.

Selection and testing of superior recombinants: This step
consists of selecting, among the progeny of the hybrids, those plants
that have the desired character combination. The selection process is
crucial to the success of the breeding objective and requires careful
scientiﬁc evaluation of the progeny. This step yields plants that are
superior to both of the parents (very often more than one superior
progeny plant may become available). These are self-pollinated for
several generations till they reach a state of uniformity (homozygosity),
so that the characters will not segregate in the progeny.

Testing, release and commercialisation of new cultivars: The
newly selected lines are evaluated for their yield and other agronomic
traits of quality, disease resistance, etc. This evaluation is done by
growing these in the research fields and recording their performance
under ideal fertiliser application, irrigation, and other crop
management practices. The evaluation in research ﬁelds is followed

2019-2020

   

I7I