/
)) BIOLOGY

Placental mammals Australian mar supials different habitats), one can call this convergent
evolution. Placental mammals in Australia also
exhibit adaptive radiation in evolving into
varieties of such placental mammals each of
which appears to be ‘similar’ to a corresponding
marsupial (e.g., Placental wolf and Tasmanian
wolf-marsupial). (Figure 7. 7) .

 

7.5 BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION

Evolution by natural selection, in a true sense
would have started when cellular forms of life
with differences in metabolic capability
originated on earth.
The essence of Darwinian theory about
evolution is natural selection. The rate of
My QM appearance of new forms is linked to the life cycle
31):?th fuscus ‘ or the life span. Microbes that divide fast have
the ability to multiply and become millions of
individuals within hours. A colony of bacteria
(say A) growing on a given medium has built-in
variation in terms of ability to utilise a feed
component. A change in the medium
composition would bring out only that part of
the population (say B) that can survive under
the new conditions. In due course of time this
variant population outgrows the others and
appears as new species. This would happen
within days. For the same thing to happen in a
ﬁsh or fowl would take million of years as life
spans of these animals are in years. Here we say
that ﬁtness of B is better than that of A under
the new conditions. Nature selects for ﬁtness.

 

 

Figure 7.7 Picture showing convergent evolution

of Australian Marsupials and
placental mammals One must remember that the so-called ﬁtness is

based on characteristics which are inherited.

Hence, there must be a genetic basis for getting selected and to evolve.
Another way of saying the same thing is that some organisms are better
1 3 4 adapted to survive in an otherwise hostile environment. Adaptive ability is
inherited. It has a genetic basis. Fitness is the end result of the ability to
adapt and get selected by nature.
Branching descent and natural selection are the two key concepts
of Darwinian Theory of Evolution (Figures 7.7 and 7.8).
Even before Darwin, a French naturalist Lamarck had said that
evolution of life forms had occurred but driven by use and disuse of

2019-2020