BIOLOGY

predator or the effect of a pesticide application, we always evaluate them
in terms of any change in the population size. The size, in nature, could
be as low as < 10 (Siberian cranes at Bharatpur wetlands in any year) or
go into millions (Chlamydomonas in a pond). Population size, technically
called population density (designated as N), need not necessarily be
measured in numbers only. Although total number is generally the most
appropriate measure of population density, it is in some cases either
meaningless or difficult to determine. In an area, if there are 200 carrot
grass (Parthenium hysterophorus) plants but only a single huge banyan
tree with a large canopy, stating that the population density of banyan is
low relative to that of carrot grass amounts to underestimating the
enormous role of the Banyan in that community. In such cases, the per
cent cover or biomass is a more meaningful measure of the population
size. Total number is again not an easily adoptable measure if the
population is huge and counting is impossible or very time-consuming.
If you have a dense laboratory culture of bacteria in a petri dish what is
the best measure to report its density? Sometimes, for certain ecological
investigations, there is no need to know the absolute population densities;
relative densities serve the purpose equally well. For instance, the number
of fish caught per trap is good enough measure of its total population
density in the lake. We are mostly obliged to estimate population sizes
indirectly, without actually counting them or seeing them. The tiger census
in our national parks and tiger reserves is often based on pug marks and
fecal pellets.

13.2.2 Population Growth

The size of a population for any species is not a static parameter. It keeps
changing with time, depending on various factors including food
availability, predation pressure and adverse weather. In fact, it is these
changes in population density that give us some idea of what is happening
to the population — whether it is ﬂourishing or declining. Whatever might
be the ultimate reasons, the density of a population in a given habitat
during a given period, ﬂuctuates due to changes in four basic processes,
two of which (natality and immigration) contribute to an increase in
population density and two (mortality and emigration) to a decrease.
(i) Natality refers to the number of births during a given period in the
population that are added to the initial density.
(ii) Mortality is the number of deaths in the population during a given
period.

(iii) Immigration is the number of individuals of the same species that
have come into the habitat from elsewhere during the time period
under consideration.

(iv) Emigration is the number of individuals of the population who
left the habitat and gone elsewhere during the time period under
consideration.

2019-2020