BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION

harbour is extremely high and strict protection of these hotspots could
reduce the ongoing mass extinctions by almost 30 per cent.

In India, ecologically unique and biodiversity-rich regions are legally
protected as biosphere reserves, national parks and sanctuaries. India
now has 14 biosphere reserves, 90 national parks and 448 wildlife
sanctuaries. India has also a history of religious and cultural traditions
that emphasised protection of nature. In many cultures, tracts of forest
were set aside, and all the trees and wildlife within were venerated and
given total protection. Such sacred groves are found in Khasi and J aintia
Hills in Meghalaya, Aravalli Hills of Raj asthan, Western Ghat regions of
Karnataka and Maharashtra and the Sarguj a, Chanda and Bastar areas
of Madhya Pradesh. In Meghalaya, the sacred groves are the last refuges
for a large number of rare and threatened plants.

Ex situ Conservation— In this approach, threatened animals and plants
are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting
where they can be protected and given special care. Zoological parks,
botanical gardens and wildlife safari parks serve this purpose. There are
many animals that have become extinct in the wild but continue to be
maintained in zoological parks. In recent years ex situ conservation has
advanced beyond keeping threatened species in enclosures. Now gametes
of threatened species can be preserved in viable and fertile condition for
long periods using cryopreservation techniques, eggs can be fertilised in
vitro, and plants can be propagated using tissue culture methods. Seeds
of different genetic strains of commercially important plants can be kept
for long periods in seed banks.

Biodiversity knows no political boundaries and its conservation is
therefore a collective responsibility of all nations. The historic Convention
on Biological Diversity (The Earth Summit’) held in Rio de J aneiro in
1 992, called upon all nations to take appropriate measures for
conservation of biodiversity and sustainable utilisation of its beneﬁts. In
a follow-up, the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in 2002
in J ohannesburg, South Africa, 190 countries pledged their commitment
to achieve by 20 10, a signiﬁcant reduction in the current rate of biodiversity
loss at global, regional and local levels.

 

 

SUMMARY

Since life originated on earth nearly 3.8 billion years ago, there had
been enormous diversiﬁcation of life forms on earth. Biodiversity refers
to the sum total of diversity that exists at all levels of biological
organisation. Of particular importance is the diversity at genetic, species
and ecosystem levels and conservation efforts are aimed at protecting
diversity at all these levels.

More than 1.5 million species have been recorded in the world, but
there might still be nearly 6 million species on earth waiting to be

 

 

 

2019-2020

 

"\le

267