BIOLOGY

shapes and sizes dominated on earth. Giant ferns (pteridophytes) were
present but they all fell to form coal deposits slowly. Some of these land
reptiles went back into water to evolve into ﬁsh like reptiles probably 200
mya (e.g. Ichthyosaurs). The land reptiles were, of course, the dinosaurs.
The biggest of them, i.e., Tyrannosaurus rex was about 20 feet in height
and had huge fearsome dagger like teeth. About 65 mya, the dinosaurs
suddenly disappeared from the earth. We do not know the true reason.
Some say climatic changes killed them. Some say most of them evolved
into birds. The truth may live in between. Small sized reptiles of that era
still exist today.

The ﬁrst mammals were like shrews. Their fossils are small sized.
Mammals were viviparous and protected their unborn young inside the
mother’s body. Mammals were more intelligent in sensing and avoiding
danger at least. When reptiles came down mammals took over this earth.
There were in South America mammals resembling horse, hippopotamus,
bear, rabbit, etc. Due to continental drift, when South America joined
North America, these animals were overridden by North American fauna.
Due to the same continental drift pouched mammals of Australia survived
because of lack of competition from any other mammal.

Lest we forget, some mammals live wholly in water. Whales, dolphins,
seals and sea cows are some examples. Evolution of horse, elephant, dog,
etc., are special stories of evolution. You will learn about these in higher
classes. The most successful story is the evolution of man with language
skills and self-consciousness.

A rough sketch of the evolution of life forms, their times on a geological
scale are indicated in (Figure 7 .9 and 7.10).

7.9 ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF MAN

About 15 mya, primates called Dryopithecus and Ramapithecus were
existing. They were hairy and walked like gorillas and chimpanzees.
Ramapithecus was more man-like while Dryopithecus was more
ape-like. Few fossils of man-like bones have been discovered in Ethiopia
and Tanzania (Figure 7.1 1). These revealed hominid features leading to
the belief that about 3-4 mya, man-like primates walked in eastern Africa.
They were probably not taller than 4 feet but walked up right. Two mya,
Australopithecines probably lived in East African grasslands. Evidence
shows they hunted with stone weapons but essentially ate fruit. Some of
the bones among the bones discovered were different. This creature was
called the ﬁrst human-like being the hominid and was called Homo habilis.
The brain capacities were between 650-800cc. They probably did not eat
meat. Fossils discovered in Java in 1891 revealed the next stage, i.e., Homo
erectus about 1.5 mya. Homo erectus had a large brain around 90000.

2019—2020