108

Mouth

Pharynx

  
    
    
    

Oesophagus

Gizzard

Stomach

Pre-typhlosolar
part of intestine

Intestinal
caecum

Lymph gland

Typhlosolar
part of intestine

Intestinal lumen

Typhlosole

Figure 7.10 Alimentary canal of earthworm

BIOLOGY

up of a single layer of columnar epithelial cells
which contain secretory gland cells.

The alimentary canal is a straight tube and
runs between first to last segment of the body.
(Figure 7 . 10). A terminal mouth opens into the
buccal cavity (1-3 segments) which leads into
muscular pharynx. A small narrow tube,
oesophagus (5-7 segments), continues into a
muscular gizzard (8-9 segments). It helps in
grinding the soil particles and decaying leaves,
etc. The stomach extends from 9- 14 segments.
The food of the earthworm is decaying leaves and
organic matter mixed with soil. Calciferous
glands, present in the stomach, neutralise the
humic acid present in humus. Intestine starts
from the 15th segment onwards and continues
till the last segment. A pair of short and conical
intestinal caecae project from the intestine on the
26‘11 segment. The characteristic feature of the
intestine after 26th segment except the last
2301-25th segments is the presence of internal
median fold of dorsal wall called typhlosole. This
increases the effective area of absorption in the
intestine. The alimentary canal opens to the
exterior by a small rounded aperture called anus.
The ingested organic rich soil passes through the
digestive tract where digestive enzymes
breakdown complex food into smaller absorbable
units. These simpler molecules are absorbed
through intestinal membranes and are utilised.

Pheretima exhibits a closed type of
blood vascular system, consisting of blood
vessels, capillaries and heart. (Figure 7.1 1). Due
to closed circulatory system, blood is conﬁned
to the heart and blood vessels. Contractions
keep blood circulating in one direction. Smaller
blood vessels supply the gut, nerve cord, and
the body wall. Blood glands are present on the
4th, 5th and 6th segments. They produce blood
cells and haemoglobin which is dissolved in
blood plasma. Blood cells are phagocytic in
nature. Earthworms lack specialised breathing
devices. Respiratory exchange occurs through
moist body surface into their blood stream.

2019-2020