BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION

TABLE 2 . 1 Characteristics of the Five Kingdoms
Five Kingdoms

Characters

Monera Protista Fungi Plantae
Cell type Prokaryotic Eukaryotic Eukaryotic Eukaryotic
Cell wall Noncellulosic Present in Present Present

(Polysaccharide some with chitin (cellulose)

+ amino acid)
Nuclear Absent Present Present Present
membrane
Body Cellular Cellular Multiceullar/ Tissue /
organisation loose tissue organ

Autotro hic .

(chemospyn- Autotrophic Hetero trOPhIC Autotrophic

thetic and (Photosyn- (Saprophytic/ (Photosyn-
Mode of photosynthetic) thetic) and Parasrtic) thetic)
nutrition and H et er 0_ Hetero-

trophic (sapro- trophic

phytic / para-

sitic)

R.H. Whittaker (1969) proposed a Five Kingdom Classiﬁcation. The
kingdoms deﬁned by him were named Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae
and Animalia. The main criteria for classification used by him include cell
structure, body organisation, mode of nutrition, reproduction and
phylogenetic relationships. Table 2.1 gives a comparative account of different
characteristics of the ﬁve kingdoms.

The three-domain system has also been proposed that divides the Kingdom
Monera into two domains, leaving the remaining eukaryotic kingdoms in the
third domain and thereby a six kingdom classification. You will learn about
this system in detail at higher classes.

Let us look at this ﬁve kingdom classification to understand the issues
and considerations that inﬂuenced the classiﬁcation system. Earlier
classiﬁcation systems included bacteria, blue green algae, fungi, mosses,
ferns, gymnosperms and the angiosperms under ‘Plants’. The character
that uniﬁed this whole kingdom was that all the organisms included had a
cell wall in their cells. This placed together groups which widely differed in
other characteristics. It brought together the prokaryotic bacteria and the
blue green algae (cyanobacteria) with other groups which were eukaryotic.
It also grouped together the unicellular organisms and the multicellular
ones, say, for example, Chlamydomonas and Spirogyra were placed together
under algae. The classiﬁcation did not differentiate between the heterotrophic
group — fungi, and the autotrophic green plants, though they also showed
a characteristic difference in their walls composition — the fungi had chitin

2019-2020

17

Animalia

Eukaryotic

Absent

Present

Tissue / organ /
organ system

Heterotrophic
( H o lo 2 o i c /
Saprophytic
etc.)