36

 

BIOLOGY

organs are produced either on the same or on different thalli. The
sporophyte is differentiated into a foot, seta and capsule. After meiosis,
spores are produced within the capsule. These spores germinate to form
free-living gametophytes.

3.2.2 Mosses

The predominant stage of the life cycle of a moss is the gametophyte which
consists of two stages. The ﬁrst stage is the protonema stage, which
develops directly from a spore. It is a creeping, green, branched and
frequently ﬁlamentous stage. The second stage is the leafy stage, which
develops from the secondary protonema as a lateral bud. They consist of
upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. They are attached
to the soil through multicellular and branched rhizoids. This stage bears
the sex organs.

Vegetative reproduction in mosses is by fragmentation and budding
in the secondary protonema. In sexual reproduction, the sex organs
antheridia and archegonia are produced at the apex of the leafy shoots.
After fertilisation, the zygote develops into a sporophyte, consisting of a
foot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte in mosses is more elaborate than
that in liverworts. The capsule contains spores. Spores are formed after
meiosis. The mosses have an elaborate mechanism of spore dispersal.
Common examples of mosses are Funaria, Polytrichum and Sphagnum
(Figure 3.2).

3.3 PTERIDOPHYTES

The Pteridophytes include horsetails and ferns. Pteridophytes are used
for medicinal purposes and as soil-binders. They are also frequently grown
as ornamentals. Evolutionarily, they are the ﬁrst terrestrial plants to
possess vascular tissues — xylem and phloem. You shall study more about
these tissues in Chapter 6. The pteridophytes are found in cool, damp,
shady places though some may ﬂourish well in sandy-soil conditions.
You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the life
cycle is the gametophytic plant body. However, in pteridophytes, the
main plant body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root,
stem and leaves (Figure 3.3). These organs possess well-differentiated
vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are small (microphylls) as
in Selaginella or large (macrophylls) as in ferns. The sporophytes bear
sporangia that are subtended by leaf-like appendages called
sporophylls. In some cases sporophylls may form distinct compact
structures called strobili or cones (Selaginella, Equisetum). The
sporangia produce spores by meiosis in spore mother cells. The spores
germinate to give rise to inconspicuous, small but multicellular,