BIOLOGY

sexual co-habitation. The reasons for this could be many—physical,
congenital, diseases, drugs, immunological or even psychological.
In India, often the female is blamed for the couple being childless, but
more often than not, the problem lies in the male partner. Specialised
health care units (infertility clinics, etc.) could help in diagnosis and
corrective treatment of some of these disorders and enable these couples to
have children. However, where such corrections are not possible, the couples
could be assisted to have children through certain special techniques
commonly known as assisted reproductive technologies (ART).

In vitro fertilisation (NF—fertilisation outside the body in almost
similar conditions as that in the body) followed by embryo transfer (ET)
is one of such methods. In this method, popularly known as test tube
baby programme, ova from the wife / donor (female) and sperms from the
husband / donor (male) are collected and are induced to form zygote under
simulated conditions in the laboratory. The zygote or early embryos (with
upto 8 blastomeres) could then be transferred into the fallopian tube
(ZIFT—zygote intra fallopian transfer) and embryos with more than
8 blastomeres, into the uterus (IUT - intra uterine transfer), to complete
its further development. Embryos formed by in-vivo fertilisation (fusion
of gametes within the female) also could be used for such transfer to assist
those females who cannot conceive.

Transfer of an ovum collected from a donor into the fallopian tube
(GIFT — gamete intra fallopian transfer) of another female who cannot
produce one, but can provide suitable environment for fertilisation and
further development is another method attempted. Intra cytoplasmic
sperm injection UCSI) is another specialised procedure to form an embryo
in the laboratory in which a sperm is directly injected into the ovum.
Infertility cases either due to inability of the male partner to inseminate
the female or due to very low sperm counts in the ejaculates, could be
corrected by artificial insemination (AI) technique. In this technique,
the semen collected either from the husband or a healthy donor is artiﬁcially
introduced either into the vagina or into the uterus (IUI — intra—uterine
insemination) of the female.

Though options are many, all these techniques require extremely high
precision handling by specialised professionals and expensive
instrumentation. Therefore, these facilities are presently available only in
very few centres in the country. Obviously their beneﬁts is affordable to
only a limited number of people. Emotional, religious and social factors
are also deterrents in the adoption of these methods. Since the ultimate
aim of all these procedures is to have children, in India we have so many
orphaned and destitute children, who would probably not survive till
maturity, unless taken care of. Our laws permit legal adoption and it is
as yet, one of the best methods for couples looking for parenthood.

2019-2020