STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

Macro-
phage

Fibroblast — .

Collagen
fibres

 

  
 
 

103

Fat storage
area

Nucleus

Plasma
Membrane

 

(a) Mast
cell

 

 

Figure 7.4 Loose connective tissue : (a) Areolar tissue (b) Adipose tissue

include cartilage, bone, adipose, and blood. In all
connective tissues except blood, the cells secrete ﬁbres of
structural proteins called collagen or elastin. The fibres
provide strength, elasticity and ﬂexibility to the tissue.
These cells also secrete modified polysaccharides, which
accumulate between cells and fibres and act as
matrix (ground substance). Connective tissues are
classified into three types: (i) Loose connective tissue,
(ii) Dense connective tissue and (iii) Specialised
connective tissue.

Loose connective tissue has cells and fibres loosely
arranged in a semi-ﬂuid ground substance, for example,
areolar tissue present beneath the skin (Figure 7.4). Often
it serves as a support framework for epithelium. It
contains fibroblasts (cells that produce and secrete ﬁbres),
macrophages and mast cells. Adipose tissue is another
type of loose connective tissue located mainly beneath the
skin. The cells of this tissue are specialised to store fats.
The excess of nutrients which are not used immediately
are converted into fats and are stored in this tissue.

Fibres and fibroblasts are compactly packed in the
dense connective tissues. Orientation of ﬁbres show a
regular or irregular pattern and are called dense regular
and dense irregular tissues. In the dense regular
connective tissues, the collagen fibres are present in rows
between many parallel bundles of fibres. Tendons, which
attach skeletal muscles to bones and ligaments which
attach one bone to another are examples of this tissue.
Dense irregular connective tissue has fibroblasts and
many fibres (mostly collagen) that are oriented differently
(Figure 7.5). This tissue is present in the skin. Cartilage,

2019-2020

 

 

Figure 7.5 Dense connective tissue:
(a) Dense regular
(b) Dense irregular