RESPIRATION IN PLANTS

produced in the mitochondrial matrix
during citric acid cycle are oxidised by an
NADH dehydrogenase (complex I), and
electrons are then transferred to
ubiquinone located
Within the inner membrane. Ubiquinone
also receives reducing equivalents via
FADH2 (complex II) that is generated
during oxidation of succinate in the citric
acid cycle. The reduced ubiquinone
(ubiquinol) is then oxidised with the
transfer of electrons to cytochrome 0 via
cytochrome bc1 complex (complex III).
Cytochrome c is a small protein attached
to the outer surface of the inner
membrane and acts as a mobile carrier
for transfer of electrons between complex
III and IV. Complex IV refers to
cytochrome c oxidase complex containing
cytochromes a and a3, and two copper
centres.

When the electrons pass from one
carrier to another via complex I to IV in
the electron transport chain, they are
coupled to ATP synthase (complex V) for
the production of ATP from ADP and
inorganic phosphate. The number of ATP
molecules synthesised depends on the
nature of the electron donor. Oxidation of
one molecule of NADH gives rise to 3
molecules of ATP, While that of one
molecule of FADH2 produces 2 molecules
of ATP. Although the aerobic process of
respiration takes place only in the
presence of oxygen, the role of oxygen is
limited to the terminal stage of the

233

 

I11Lcr—mcmbn-mc Inner Mimrh nn drir-JI
spam.- n'lcmbmnc

Matrix

NADIH H

 

4H<

   
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

:' (Fe—SK ......... “FMN (JP-— NAD

Complex l
{NADH dehydrogenascl

Complex [II
(Cytochrome hat]

Complex II

ISLIISEIIHJH' (IL-115'drugL-nzasup

Succinnlc'

Fu n1 urzl’l 0

30+ 2H

2H

H .0

Complex W

ICyInI'h l'Hll'lt‘ r r-xiclnm-l

Ed

 

ADP+P

 

Figure 14.4 Electron Transport System (ETS)

process. Yet, the presence of oxygen is vital, since it drives the Whole
process by removing hydrogen from the system. Oxygen acts as the final
hydrogen acceptor. Unlike photophosphorylation Where it is the light
energy that is utilised for the production of proton gradient required for
phosphorylation, in respiration it is the energy of oxidation-reduction
utilised for the same process. It is for this reason that the process is called

oxidative phosphorylation.

You have already studied about the mechanism of membrane-linked
ATP synthesis as explained by chemiosmotic hypothesis in the earlier
chapter. As mentioned earlier, the energy released during the electron

201 9-2020