TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

the loss of water in the form of vapours from the plant parts through stomata.
Temperature, light, humidity, wind speed and number of stomata affect the rate
of transpiration. Excess water is also removed through tips of leaves of plants by
guttation.

Phloem is responsible for transport of food (primarily) sucrose from the source

to the sink. The translocation in phloem is bi-directional; the source-sink
relationship is variable. The translocation in phloem is explained by the pressure-

ﬂow hypothesis.
EXERCISES
1. What are the factors affecting the rate of diffusion?
2. What are porins? What role do they play in diffusion?
3. Describe the role played by protein pumps during active transport in plants.
4. Explain why pure water has the maximum water potential.
5. Differentiate between the following:
(a) Diffusion and Osmosis
(b) Transpiration and Evaporation
(c) Osmotic Pressure and Osmotic Potential
(d) Imbibition and Diffusion
(e) Apoplast and Symplast pathways of movement of water in plants.
(1) Guttation and Transpiration.
6. Brieﬂy describe water potential. What are the factors affecting it?
7. What happens when a pressure greater than the atmospheric pressure is applied
to pure water or a solution?
8. (a) With the help of well-labelled diagrams, describe the process of plasmolysis
in plants, giving appropriate examples.
(b) Explain what will happen to a plant cell if it is kept in a solution having
higher water potential.
9. How is the mycorrhizal association helpful in absorption of water and minerals
in plants?
10. What role does root pressure play in water movement in plants?
1 1. Describe transpiration pull model of water transport in plants. What are the
factors inﬂuencing transpiration? How is it useful to plants?
12. Discuss the factors responsible for ascent of xylem sap in plants.
13. What essential role does the root endoderrnis play during mineral absorption in
plants?
14. Explain why xylem transport is unidirectional and phloem transport
bi-directional.
15. Explain pressure ﬂow hypothesis of translocation of sugars in plants.
16. What causes the opening and closing of guard cells of stomata during

transpiration?

 

193