ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

 

Figure 13.7 Mutual relationship between fig tree and wasp: (a) Fig ﬂower is pollinated

(V)

(b)
by wasp; (b) Wasp laying eggs in a fig fruit

between sea anemone that has stinging tentacles and the clown
ﬁsh that lives among them. The ﬁsh gets protection from predators
which stay away from the stinging tentacles. The anemone does
not appear to derive any beneﬁt by hosting the clown ﬁsh.
Mutualism: This interaction confers beneﬁts on both the interacting
species. Lichens represent an intimate mutualistic relationship
between a fungus and photosynthesising algae or cyanobacteria.
Similarly, the mycorrhizae are associations between fungi and the
roots of higher plants. The fungi help the plant in the absorption of
essential nutrients from the soil while the plant in turn provides the
fungi with energy-yielding carbohydrates.

The most spectacular and evolutionarily fascinating examples
of mutualism are found in plant-animal relationships. Plants need
the help of animals for pollinating their ﬂowers and dispersing their
seeds. Animals obviously have to be paid ‘fees’ for the services that
plants expect from them. Plants offer rewards or fees in the form of
pollen and nectar for pollinators and juicy and nutritious fruits for
seed dispersers. But the mutually beneﬁcial system should also
be safeguarded against ‘cheaters’, for example, animals that try to
steal nectar without aiding in pollination. Now you can see why
plant-animal interactions often involve co-evolution of the
mutualists, that is, the evolutions of the ﬂower and its pollinator
species are tightly linked with one another. In many species of ﬁg
trees, there is a tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator
species of wasp (Figure 13.7). It means that a given ﬁg species can
be pollinated only by its ‘partner’ wasp species and no other species.
The female wasp uses the fruit not only as an oviposition (egg-laying)
site but uses the developing seeds within the fruit for nourishing

2019-2020

237