PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

(Glu) by Valine (Val) at the sixth position of the beta globin chain of the
haemoglobin molecule. The substitution of amino acid in the globin
protein results due to the single base substitution at the sixth codon of
the beta globin gene from GAG to GUG. The mutant haemoglobin molecule
undergoes polymerisation under low oxygen tension causing the change
in the shape of the RBC from biconcave disc to elongated sickle like
structure (Figure 5. 1 5).

Phenylketonuria : This inborn error of metabolism is also inherited as
the autosomal recessive trait. The affected individual lacks an enzyme
that converts the amino acid phenylalanine into tyrosine. As a result of
this phenylalanine is accumulated and converted into phenylpyruvic acid
and other derivatives. Accumulation of these in brain results in mental
retardation. These are also excreted through urine because of its poor
absorption by kidney.

Thalassemia : This is also an autosome-linked recessive blood disease
transmitted from parents to the offspring when both the partners are
unaffected carrier for the gene (or heterozygous). The defect could be due
to either mutation or deletion which ultimately results in reduced rate of
synthesis of one of the globin chains (0L and B chains) that make up
haemoglobin. This causes the formation of abnormal haemoglobin
molecules resulting into anaemia which is characteristic of the disease.
’Ihalassemia can be classiﬁed according to which chain of the haemoglobin
molecule is affected. In 0c Thalassemia, production of Of globin chain is
affected while in B Thalassemia, production of B globin chain is affected.
0c Thalassemia is controlled by two closely linked genes HBAl and HBA2
on chromosome 1 6 of each parent and it is observed due to mutation or
deletion of one or more of the four genes. The more genes affected, the
less alpha globin molecules produced. While B Thalassemia is controlled
by a single gene HBB on chromosome 1 1 of each parent and occurs due
to mutation of one or both the genes. Thalassemia differs from sickle-cell
anaemia in that the former is a quantitative problem of synthesising too
few globin molecules while the latter is a qualitative problem of
synthesising an incorrectly functioning globin.

5.8.3 Chromosomal Disorders

The chromosomal disorders on the other hand are caused due to absence
or excess or abnormal arrangement of one or more chromosomes.

Failure of segregation of chromatids during cell division cycle results
in the gain or loss of a chromosome(s), called aneuploidy. For example,
Down’s syndrome results in the gain of extra copy of chromosome 21.
Similarly, Turner’s syndrome results due to loss of an X chromosome in
human females. Failure of cytokinesis after telophase stage of cell division
results in an increase in a whole set of chromosomes in an organism and,
this phenomenon is known as polyploidy. This condition is often seen in
plants.

The total number of chromosomes in a normal human cell is 46
(23 pairs). Out of these 22 pairs are autosomes and one pair of
chromosomes are sex chromosome. Sometimes, though rarely, either an
additional copy of a chromosome may be included in an individual or an

2019-2020