ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

CNG burns most efﬁciently, unlike petrol or diesel, in the automobiles
and very little of it is left unburnt. Moreover, CNG is cheaper than petrol
or diesel, cannot be siphoned off by thieves and adulterated like petrol
or diesel. The main problem with switching over to CNG is the difﬁculty
of laying down pipelines to deliver CNG through distribution points/
pumps and ensuring uninterrupted supply. Simultaneously parallel
steps taken in Delhi for reducing vehicular pollution include phasing
out of old vehicles, use of unleaded petrol, use of low-sulphur petrol
and diesel, use of catalytic converters in vehicles, application of stringent
pollution-level norms for vehicles, etc.

The Government of India through a new auto fuel policy has laid
out a roadmap to cut down vehicular pollution in Indian cities. More
stringent norms for fuels means steadily reducing the sulphur and
aromatic content in petrol and diesel fuels. Euro III norms, for example,
stipulate that sulphur be controlled at 350 parts-per-million (ppm) in
diesel and 150 ppm in petrol. Aromatic hydrocarbons are to be contained
at 42 per cent of the concerned fuel. The goal, according to the roadmap,
is to reduce sulphur to 50 ppm in petrol and diesel and bring down the
level to 35 per cent. Corresponding to the fuel, vehicle engines will also
need to be upgraded.

Mass Emission Standards (Bharat Stage II which is equivalent to
Euro-II norms) are no more applicable in any of the cities of India.
Details of the latest Mass Emission Standards in India are provided
below (Table 16.1)

Table 16.1: Table Showing the Mass Emission Standards in India

| Type of Vehicles Norms Cities of Implementation I

4 Wheelers Bharat Stage IV Throughout the country
since April 201 7

 

3 Wheelers Bharat Stage IV Throughout the country
since 1st April 201 7

2 Wheelers Bharat Stage IV Throughout the country
since April 201 7

Thanks to the efforts made, the air quality of Delhi has signiﬁcantly

improved. According to an estimate, a substantial fall in CO2 and SO2
level has been found in Delhi between 1997 and 2005.

16.2 WATER POLLUTION AND ITS CONTROL

Human beings have been abusing the water-bodies around the world by
disposing into them all kinds of waste. We tend to believe that water can
wash away everything not taking cognizance of the fact that the water
bodies are our lifeline as well as that of all other living organisms. Can
you list what all we tend to try and wash away through our rivers and
drains? Due to such activities of human kind, the ponds, lakes, stream,

2019-2020

273