CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION

an increased concentration of glucose in blood. In addition, they also
stimulate the breakdown of lipids and proteins.

The adrenal cortex can be divided into three layers, called zona
reticularis (inner layer), zona fasciculata (middle layer) and zona
glomerulosa (outer layer). The adrenal cortex secretes many hormones,
commonly called as corticoids. The corticoids, which are involved in
carbohydrate metabolism are called glucocorticoids. In our body, cortisol
is the main glucocorticoid. Corticoids, which regulate the balance of water
and electrolytes in our body are called mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone is
the main mineralocorticoid in our body.

Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, lipolysis and proteolysis;
and inhibit cellular uptake and utilisation of amino acids. Cortisol is also
involved in maintaining the cardio-vascular system as well as the kidney
functions. Glucocorticoids, particularly cortisol, produces anti-
inﬂammatory reactions and suppresses the immune response. Cortisol
stimulates the RBC production. Aldosterone acts mainly at the renal
tubules and stimulates the reabsorption of Na“ and water and excretion
of K’“ and phosphate ions. ’Ihus, aldosterone helps in the maintenance of
electrolytes, body ﬂuid volume, osmotic pressure and blood pressure.
Small amounts of androgenic steroids are also secreted by the adrenal
cortex which play a role in the growth of axial hair, pubic hair and facial
hair during puberty.

22.2.8 Pancreas

Pancreas is a composite gland (Figure 22.1) which acts as both exocrine
and endocrine gland. The endocrine pancreas consists of ‘Islets of
Langerhans’. There are about 1 to 2 million Islets of Langerhans in a
normal human pancreas representing only 1 to 2 per cent of the pancreatic
tissue. The two main types of cells in the Islet of Langerhans are called
a—cells and B—cells. The oc—cells secrete a hormone called glucagon, while
the B—cells secrete insulin.

Glucagon is a peptide hormone, and plays an important role in
maintaining the normal blood glucose levels. Glucagon acts mainly on
the liver cells (hepatocytes) and stimulates glycogenolysis resulting in an
increased blood sugar (hyperglycemia). In addition, this hormone
stimulates the process of gluconeogenesis which also contributes to
hyperglycemia. Glucagon reduces the cellular glucose uptake and
utilisation. Thus, glucagon is a hyperglycemic hormone.

Insulin is a peptide hormone, which plays a major role in the
regulation of glucose homeostasis. Insulin acts mainly on hepatocytes
and adipocytes (cells of adipose tissue), and enhances cellular glucose

 

337