156

 
  
   

Potential Energy

Figure 9.6 Concept of activation energy

BIOLOGY

Transition state towards the ‘active site’. There is thus, an

obligatory formation of an ‘ES’ complex. E
ACtiVatiOfl energy stands for enzyme. This complex formation is
a transient phenomenon. During the state
where substrate is bound to the enzyme active
site, a new structure of the substrate called
energy with enzyme transition state structure is formed. Very soon,
after the expected bond breaking/making is
completed, the product is released from the
active site. In other words, the structure of
substrate gets transformed into the structure
of product(s). The pathway of this
transformation must go through the so-called
PrOdUCt (P) transition state structure. There could be

progress of reaction many more ‘altered structural states’ between

the stable substrate and the product. Implicit
in this statement is the fact that all other
intermediate structural states are unstable. Stability is something related
to energy status of the molecule or the structure. Hence, when we look at
this pictorially through a graph it looks like something as in Figure 9.6.

The y-axis represents the potential energy content. The x—axis
represents the progression of the structural transformation or states
through the ‘transition state’. You would notice two things. The energy
level difference between S and P. If ‘P’ is at a lower level than ‘S’, the reaction
is an exothermic reaction. One need not supply energy (by heating) in
order to form the product. However, whether it is an exothermic or
spontaneous reaction or an endothermic or energy requiring reaction,
the ‘S’ has to go through a much higher energy state or transition state.
The difference in average energy content of ‘S’ from that of this transition
state is called ‘activation energy’.

Enzymes eventually bring down this energy barrier making the
transition of ‘S’ to ‘P’ more easy.

9.12.3 Nature of Enzyme Action

Each enzyme (E) has a substrate (S) binding site in its molecule so that a
highly reactive enzyme-substrate complex (ES) is produced. This
complex is short-lived and dissociates into its product(s) P and the
unchanged enzyme with an intermediate formation of the enzyme-product
complex (EP).

The formation of the ES complex is essential for catalysis.