HUMAN REPRODUCTION

A functional mammary gland is characteristic of all female mammals.
The mammary glands are paired structures (breasts) that contain
glandular tissue and variable amount of fat. The glandular tissue of each
breast is divided into 1 5-20 mammary lobes containing clusters of cells
called alveoli (Figure 3.4). The cells of alveoli secrete milk, which is stored
in the cavities (lumens) of alveoli. The alveoli open into mammary tubules.
The tubules of each lobe join to form a mammary duct. Several mammary
ducts join to form a wider mammary ampulla which is connected to
lactiferous duct through which milk is sucked out.

3.3 GAMETOGENESIS

The primary sex organs — the testis in the males and the ovaries in the
females—produce gametes, i.e, sperms and ovum, respectively, by the
process called gametogenesis. In testis, the immature male germ cells
(spermatogonia) produce sperms by Spermatogenesis that begins at
puberty. The spermatogonia (sing. spermatogonium) present on the
inside wall of seminiferous tubules multiply by mitotic division and
increase in numbers. Each spermatogonium is diploid and contains 46
chromosomes. Some of the spermatogonia called primary
spermatocytes periodically undergo meiosis. A primary spermatocyte
completes the first meiotic division (reduction division) leading to
formation of two equal, haploid cells called
secondary spermatocytes, which have only
23 chromosomes each. The secondary
spermatocytes undergo the second meiotic
division to produce four equal, haploid
spermatids (Figure 3.5). What would be the
number of chromosome in the spermatids?
The spermatids are transformed into
spermatozoa (sperms) by the process called
spermiogenesis. After spermiogenesis,
sperm heads become embedded in the
Sertoli cells, and are finally released from
the seminiferous tubules by the process
called spermiation.

Spermatogenesis starts at the age of

     
 

Spermatozoa

Secondary
spermatocyte

Primary

' spermatocyte

Figure 3.5 Diagrammatic sectional View of a

puberty due to signiﬁcant increase in the seminiferous tubule (enlarged)

secretion of gonadotropin releasing hormone

(GnRH). This, if you recall, is a hypothalamic hormone. The increased
levels of GnRH then acts at the anterior pituitary gland and stimulates
secretion of two gonadotropins — luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH). LH acts at the Leydig cells and stimulates
synthesis and secretion of androgens. Androgens, in turn, stimulate the
process of Spermatogenesis. FSH acts on the Sertoli cells and stimulates

2019-2020

—