HUMAN HEALTH AND DISEASE

(ii) Education and counselling - Educating and counselling him /
her to face problems and stresses, and to accept disappointments
and failures as a part of life. It would also be worthwhile to channelise
the child’s energy into healthy pursuits like sports, reading, music,
yoga and other extracurricular activities.

(iii) Seeking help from parents and peers - Help from parents and
peers should be sought immediately so that they can guide
appropriately. Help may even be sought from close and trusted
friends. Besides getting proper advise to sort out their problems,
this would help young to vent their feelings of anxiety and guilt.

(iv) Looking for danger signs - Alert parents and teachers need to
look for and identify the danger signs discussed above. Even friends,
if they ﬁnd someone using drugs or alcohol, should not hesitate to
bring this to the notice of parents or teacher in the best interests of
the person concerned. Appropriate measures would then be required
to diagnose the malady and the underlying causes. This would help
in initiating proper remedial steps or treatment.

(v) Seeking professional and medical help -A lot of help is available
in the form of highly qualiﬁed psychologists, psychiatrists, and de-
addiction and rehabilitation programmes to help individuals who
have unfortunately got in the quagmire of drug/ alcohol abuse. With
such help, the affected individual with sufﬁcient efforts and will power,
can get rid of the problem completely and lead a perfectly normal
and healthy life.

 

 

SUMMARY

Health is not just the absence of disease. It is a state of complete physical,
mental, social and psychological well-being. Diseases like typhoid,
cholera, pneumonia, fungal infections of skin, malaria and many others
are a major cause of distress to human beings. Vector-borne diseases
like malaria especially one caused by Plasmodium falciparum, if not
treated, may prove fatal. Besides personal cleanliness and hygiene,
public health measures like proper disposal of waste, decontamination
of drinking water, control of vectors like mosquitoes and immunisation
are very helpful in preventing these diseases. Our immune system plays
the major role in preventing these diseases when we are exposed to
disease-causing agents. The innate defences of our body like skin,
mucous membranes, antimicrobial substances present in our tears,
saliva and the phagocytic cells help to block the entry of pathogens
into our body. If the pathogens succeed in gaining entry to our body,
specific antibodies (humoral immune response) and cells (cell mediated
immune response) serve to kill these pathogens. Immune system has
memory. On subsequent exposure to same pathogen, the immune
response is rapid and more intense. This forms the basis of protection

163

 

 

 

 

 

"\va

2019-2020