82

 

BIOLOGY

SUMMARY

Flowering plants exhibit enormous variation in shape, size, structure, mode of
nutrition, life span, habit and habitat. They have well developed root and shoot
systems. Root system is either tap root or ﬁbrous. Generally, dicotyledonous plants
have tap roots while monocotyledonous plants have ﬁbrous roots. The roots in
some plants get modiﬁed for storage of food, mechanical support and respiration.
The shoot system is differentiated into stem, leaves, ﬂowers and fruits. The
morphological features of stems like the presence of nodes and internodes,
multicellular hair and positively phototropic nature help to differentiate the stems
from roots. Stems also get modiﬁed to perform diverse functions such as storage
of food, vegetative propagation and protection under different conditions. Leaf is a
lateral outgrowth of stem developed exogeneously at the node. These are green in
colour to perform the function of photosynthesis. Leaves exhibit marked variations
in their shape, size, margin, apex and extegtyof incisions of leafg‘lade (lamina).
Like other parts of plants, the leaves also gel?kt odiﬁed intomthggfgguctures such
as tendrils, spines for climbing and proteﬁﬂon Perspective v._ L3. .

The ﬂower is a modiﬁed shoot, m 7 ‘L‘glf-gfmoifﬁ‘siémial pgwdgﬁisgon. The ﬂowers are
arranged in different types of inﬂov‘ gigehdés. They ex} it enormous variation in
structure, symmetry, position ,p’f’év‘i i {’k’relatiorkto ‘ 1‘} ‘ parts, arrangement of
petals, sepals, ovules etc. Afteiggertilgigsation, their; ‘ w vis modiﬁed into fruits and

, .4, 5
ovules into seeds. Seeds eithergm‘ﬁydbe monoco,

I Me " nous or dicotyledonous. They
vary in shape, size and pé’iuﬁ“ ‘ 'ability. \ it _“* characteristics form the basis
of classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation ofﬁoﬁgniﬁg plants. This can be illustrated
through semi-technical descriptions ”of families. Hence, a ﬂowering plant is
described in a deﬁnite sequence by using scientiﬁc terms. The ﬂoral features are

represented in the summarised form as ﬂoral diagrams and ﬂoral formula.

  
     

EXERCISES

1. What is meant by modiﬁcation of root? What type of modiﬁcation of root is found
in the:
(a) Banyan tree (b) Turnip (c) Mangrove trees

2. Justify the following statements on the basis of external features:

(i) Underground parts of a plant are not always roots.
(ii) Flower is a modified shoot.

3. How is a pinnately compound leaf different from a palmately compound leaf?

4. Explain with suitable examples the different types of phyllotaxy.