HUMAN REPRODUCTION

blastomeres is called a morula (Figure 3.1 1e). The morula continues to
divide and transforms into blastocyst (Figure 3.1 1g) as it moves further
into the uterus. The blastomeres in the blastocyst are arranged into an
outer layer called trophoblast and an inner group of cells attached to
trophoblast called the inner cell mass. The trophoblast layer then gets
attached to the endometrium and the inner cell mass gets differentiated
as the embryo. After attachment, the uterine cells divide rapidly and covers
the blastocyst. As a result, the blastocyst becomes embedded in the
endometrium of the uterus (Figure 3.1 1h). This is called implantation
and it leads to pregnancy.

3.6 PREGNANCY AND EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT

After implantation, fmger-like projections appear on the trophoblast called
chorionic villi which are surrounded by the uterine tissue and maternal
blood. The chorionic villi and uterine tissue become interdigitated with
each other and jointly form a structural and functional unit between
developing embryo (foetus) and maternal body called placenta (Figure 3. 12).

The placenta facilitate the supply of oxygen and nutrients to the
embryo and also removal of carbon dioxide and excretory/waste materials
produced by the embryo. The placenta is connected to the embryo through
an umbilical cord which helps in the transport of substances to and from
the embryo. Placenta also acts as an endocrine tissue and produces
several hormones like human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), human
placental lactogen (hPL), estrogens, progestogens, etc. In the later
phase of pregnancy, a hormone called relaxin is also secreted by
the ovary. Let us remember
that hCG, hPL and relaxin Placental villi
are produced in women ”
only during pregnancy. In
addition, during pregnancy
the levels of other hormones
like estrogens, progestogens,

. . . Umbilical ,
cortisol, prolactin, thyroxme, cord .
etc., are increased several- with its
folds in the maternal blood. vessels
Increased production of these
hormones is essential for
supporting the fetal growth,
metabolic changes in the
mother and maintenance of
pregnancy.

Immediately after
implantation, the inner cell

    
 

 

mass (embryo) differentiates Figure 3.12 The human foetus within the uterus

2019-2020