SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

Let us study formation of the embryo sac in a little more detail.
(Figure 2.8b). The nucleus of the functional megaspore divides mitotically
to form two nuclei which move to the opposite poles, forming the
2-nucleate embryo sac. Two more sequential mitotic nuclear divisions
result in the formation of the 4-nucleate and later the 8-nucleate stages
of the embryo sac. It is of interest to note that these mitotic divisions are
strictly free nuclear, that is, nuclear divisions are not followed immediately
by cell wall formation. After the 8-nucleate stage, cell walls are laid down
leading to the organisation of the typical female gametophyte
or embryo sac. Observe the distribution of cells inside the embryo sac
(Figure 2.8b, c). Six of the eight nuclei are surrounded by cell walls and
organised into cells; the remaining two nuclei, called polar nuclei are
situated below the egg apparatus in the large central cell.

There is a characteristic distribution of the cells within the embryo
sac. Three cells are grouped together at the micropylar end and constitute
the egg apparatus. The egg apparatus, in turn, consists of two synergids
and one egg cell. The synergids have special cellular thickenings at the
micropylar tip called filiform apparatus, which play an important role in
guiding the pollen tubes into the synergid. Three cells are at the chalazal
end and are called the antipodals. The large central cell, as mentioned
earlier, has two polar nuclei. Thus, a typical angiosperm embryo sac, at
maturity, though 8-nucleate is 7-celled.

2.2.3 Pollination

In the preceding sections you have learnt that the male and female gametes
in ﬂowering plants are produced in the pollen grain and embryo sac,
respectively. As both types of gametes are non-motile, they have to be
brought together for fertilisation to occur. How is this achieved?
Pollination is the mechanism to achieve this objective. Transfer
of pollen grains (shed from the anther) to the stigma of a pistil is
termed pollination. Flowering plants have evolved an amazing array
of adaptations to achieve pollination. They make use of external
agents to achieve pollination. Can you list the possible external
agents?
Kinds of Pollination : Depending on the source of pollen, pollination
can be divided into three types.

(i) Autogamy : In this type, pollination is achieved within the same
ﬂower. Transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the
same ﬂower (Figure 2.9a). In a normal ﬂower which opens and
exposes the anthers and the stigma, complete autogamy is rather
rare. Autogamy in such ﬂowers requires synchrony in pollen release
and stigma receptivity and also, the anthers and the stigma should

2019-2020