134

 

BIOLOGY

face and concave trans or the maturing face.
The cis and the trans faces of the organelle are entirely different, but
interconnected.

The golgi apparatus principally performs the function of packaging
materials, to be delivered either to the intra—cellular targets or secreted
outside the cell. Materials to be packaged in the form of vesicles from
the ER fuse with the cis face of the golgi apparatus and move towards
the maturing face. This explains, Why the golgi apparatus remains in
close association with the endoplasmic reticulum. A number of proteins
synthesised by ribosomes on the endoplasmic reticulum are modiﬁed
in the cisternae of the golgi apparatus before they are released from its
trans face. Golgi apparatus is the important site of formation of
glycoproteins and glycolipids.

8.5.3.3 Lysosomes

These are membrane bound vesicular structures formed by the process
of packaging in the golgi apparatus. The isolated lysosomal vesicles
have been found to be very rich in almost all types of hydrolytic
enzymes (hydrolases — lipases, proteases, carbohydrases) optimally
active at the acidic pH. These enzymes are capable of digesting
carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.

8.5.3.4 Vacuoles

’Ihe vacuole is the membrane-bound space found in the cytoplasm. It contains
water, sap, excretory product and other materials not useful for the cell. The
vacuole is bound by a single membrane called tonoplast. In plant cells the
vacuoles can occupy up to 90 per cent of the volume of the cell.

In plants, the tonoplast facilitates the transport of a number of ions
and other materials against concentration gradients into the vacuole, hence
their concentration is signiﬁcantly higher in the vacuole than in the
cytoplasm.

In Amoeba the contractile vacuole is important for osmoregulation
and excretion. In many cells, as in protists, food vacuoles are formed by
engulﬁng the food particles.

8. 5.4 Mitochondria

Mitochondria (sing.: mitochondrion), unless speciﬁcally stained, are not
easily visible under the microscope. The number of mitochondria per cell
is variable depending on the physiological activity of the cells. In terms of
shape and size also, considerable degree of variability is observed. Typically
it is sausage-shaped or cylindrical having a diameter of 0.2- 1 .0m (average
0.5um) and length 1 .0-4. 1 mm. Each mitochondrion is a double