Rate of photosynthesis

222

 

BIOLOGY

13. 10 FACTORS AFFECTING PHOTOSYNTHESIS

An understanding of the factors that affect photosynthesis is necessary.
The rate of photosynthesis is very important in determining the yield of
plants including crop plants. Photosynthesis is under the inﬂuence of
several factors, both internal (plant) and external. The plant factors include
the number, size, age and orientation of leaves, mesophyll cells and
chloroplasts, internal CO2 concentration and the amount of chlorophyll.
The plant or internal factors are dependent on the genetic predisposition
and the growth of the plant.

The external factors would include the availability of sunlight,
temperature, CO2 concentration and water. As a plant photosynthesises,
all these factors will simultaneously affect its rate. Hence, though several
factors interact and simultaneously affect photosynthesis or CO2 ﬁxation,
usually one factor is the major cause or is the one that limits the rate.
Hence, at any point the rate will be determined by the factor available at
sub-optimal levels.

When several factors affect any [bio] chemical process, Blackman’s
(1905) Law of Limiting Factors comes into effect. This states the following:

If a chemical process is affected by more than one factor, then its
rate will be determined by the factor which is nearest to its minimal
value: it is the factor which directly affects the process if its quantity is
changed.

For example, despite the presence of a green
leaf and optimal light and CO2 conditions, the
plant may not photosynthesise if the temperature
is very low. This leaf, if given the optimal
temperature, will start photosynthesising.

13.1o.1 Light

We need to distinguish between light quality, light
intensity and the duration of exposure to light,
while discussing light as a factor that affects
photosynthesis. There is a linear relationship
between incident light and CO2 ﬁxation rates at
low light intensities. At higher light intensities,
gradually the rate does not show further increase
as other factors become limiting (Figure 13.10).

Light intenSitY What is interesting to note is that light saturation

occurs at 10 per cent of the full sunlight. Hence,

Figure 13. 10 Graph of light intensity on the except for plants in shade or in dense forests, light
rate of photosynthesis is rarely a limiting factor in nature. Increase in