BIOMOLECULES

compounds and are present not only as such but also
arranged into structures like cell membrane and other
membranes. When we grind a tissue, we are disrupting
the cell structure. Cell membrane and other
membranes are broken into pieces, and form vesicles
which are not water soluble. Therefore, these
membrane fragments in the form of vesicles get
separated along with the acid insoluble pool and hence
in the macromolecular fraction. Lipids are not strictly
macromolecules.

The acid soluble pool represents roughly the
cytoplasmic composition. The macromolecules from
cytoplasm and organelles become the acid insoluble
fraction. Together they represent the entire chemical
composition of living tissues or organisms.

In summary if we represent the chemical
composition of living tissue from abundance point of
view and arrange them class-wise, we observe that
water is the most abundant chemical in living
organisms (Table 9.4).

9.4 PROTEINS

Proteins are polypeptides. They are linear chains of
amino acids linked by peptide bonds as shown in
Figure 9.3.

Each protein is a polymer of amino acids. As there
are 20 types of amino acids (e.g., alanine, cysteine,
proline, tryptophan, lysine, etc.), a protein is a
heteropolymer and not a homopolymer. A
homopolymer has only one type of monomer repeating
‘n’ number of times. This information about the amino
acid content is important as later in your nutrition
lessons, you will learn that certain amino acids are
essential for our health and they have to be supplied
through our diet. Hence, dietary proteins are the
source of essential amino acids. Therefore, amino acids
can be essential or non-essential. The latter are those
which our body can make, while we get essential amino
acids through our diet/ food. Proteins carry out many
functions in living organisms, some transport
nutrients across cell membrane, some fight infectious
organisms, some are hormones, some are enzymes,

2019-2020

147

TABLE 9.4 Average Composition of Cells

Component 0/0 of the total
cellular mass
Water 70-90
Proteins l O— l 5
Carbohydrates 3
Lipids 2
Nucleic acids 5-7
Ions 1

TABLE 9.5 Some Proteins and their

Functions

Protein Functions

Collagen Intercellular ground
substance

Trypsin Enzyme

Insulin Hormone

Antibody Fights infectious agents

Receptor Sensory reception
(smell, taste, hormone,
etc.)

GLUT-4 Enables glucose
transport
into cells