282

 

BIOLOGY

18.2 LYMPH (TISSUE FLUID)

As the blood passes through the capillaries in tissues, some water along
with many small water soluble substances move out into the spaces
between the cells of tissues leaving the larger proteins and most of the
formed elements in the blood vessels. This ﬂuid released out is called the
interstitial ﬂuid or tissue ﬂuid. It has the same mineral distribution as
that in plasma. Exchange of nutrients, gases, etc., between the blood and
the cells always occur through this ﬂuid. An elaborate network of vessels
called the lymphatic system collects this ﬂuid and drains it back to the
major veins. The ﬂuid present in the lymphatic system is called the lymph.
Lymph is a colourless ﬂuid containing specialised lymphocytes which
are responsible for the immune responses of the body. Lymph is also an
important carrier for nutrients, hormones, etc. Fats are absorbed through
lymph in the lacteals present in the intestinal villi.

18.3 CIRCULATORY PATHWAYS

The circulatory patterns are of two types — open or closed. Open
circulatory system is present in arthropods and molluscs in which blood
pumped by the heart passes through large vessels into open spaces or
body cavities called sinuses. Annelids and chordates have a closed
circulatory system in which the blood pumped by the heart is always
circulated through a closed network of blood vessels. This pattern is
considered to be more advantageous as the ﬂow of ﬂuid can be more
precisely regulated.

All vertebrates possess a muscular chambered heart. Fishes have a
2-chambered heart with an atrium and a ventricle. Amphibians and the
reptiles (except crocodiles) have a 3-chambered heart with two atria and a
single ventricle, whereas crocodiles, birds and mammals possess a
4—chambered heart with two atria and two ventricles. In ﬁshes the heart
pumps out deoxygenated blood which is oxygenated by the gills and
supplied to the body parts from where deoxygenated blood is returned to
the heart (single circulation). In amphibians and reptiles, the left atrium
receives oxygenated blood from the gills / lungs / skin and the right atrium
gets the deoxygenated blood from other body parts. However, they get mixed
up in the single ventricle which pumps out mixed blood (incomplete double
circulation). In birds and mammals, oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
received by the left and right atria respectively passes on to the ventricles of
the same sides. The ventricles pump it out without any mixing up, i.e., two
separate circulatory pathways are present in these organisms, hence, these
animals have double circulation. Let us study the human circulatory
system.