ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

a group of individuals resulting from even asexual reproduction is also
generally considered a population for the purpose of ecological studies.
All the cormorants in a wetland, rats in an abandoned dwelling, teakwood
trees in a forest tract, bacteria in a culture plate and lotus plants in a
pond, are some examples of a population. In earlier chapters you have
learnt that although an individual organism is the one that has to cope
with a changed environment, it is at the population level that natural
selection operates to evolve the desired traits. Population ecology is,
therefore, an important area because it links ecology to population genetics
and evolution.

A population has certain attributes whereas, an individual organism
does not. An individual may have births and deaths, but a population has
birth rates and death rates. In a population these rates refer to per capita
births and deaths. The rates, hence, expressed are change in numbers
(increase or decrease) with respect to members of the population. Here is an
example. If in a pond there were 20 lotus plants last year and through
reproduction 8 new plants are added, taking the current population to 28,
we calculate the birth rate as 8/20 = 0.4 offspring per lotus per year. If 4
individuals in a laboratory population of 40 fruitﬂies died during a speciﬁed
time interval, say a week, the death rate in the population during that period
is 4/40 = 0.1 individuals per fruitﬂy per week.

Another attribute characteristic of a population is sex ratio. An
individual is either a male or a female but a population has a sex ratio
(e. g., 60 per cent of the population are females and 40 per cent males).

A population at any given time is composed of individuals of
different ages. If the age distribution (per cent individuals of a given
age or age group) is plotted for the population, the resulting structure
is called an age pyramid (Figure 13.4). For human population, the
age pyramids generally show age distribution of males and females in
a diagram. The shape of the pyramids reﬂects the growth status of
the population - (a) whether it is growing, (b) stable or (c) declining.

 

Post-reproductive

Reproductive

Pre-reproductive

Expanding Declining

Figure 13.4 Representation of age pyramids for human population

The size of the population tells us a lot about its status in the habitat.
Whatever ecological processes we wish to investigate in a population, be
it the outcome of competition with another species, the impact of a

2019—2020

 

227