11.1

11.2

11.3

11.4

11.5

11.6

Means of
Transport

Plant—Water
Relations

Long Distance
Transport of
Water

Trans pi rat ion

Uptake and
Transport of
Mineral

N um’ents

Phloem
Transport: Flow

from Source to

Sink

 

HOSOCHH

CHAPTER 1 1

TRANSPORT IN PLANTS

Have you ever wondered how water reaches the top of tall trees, or for that
matter how and why substances move from one cell to the other, whether
all substances move in a similar way, in the same direction and whether
metabolic energy is required for moving substances. Plants need to move
molecules over very long distances, much more than animals do; they also
do not have a circulatory system in place. Water taken up by the roots has
to reach all parts of the plant, up to the very tip of the growing stem. The
photosynthates or food synthesised by the leaves have also to be moved to
all parts including the root tips embedded deep inside the soil. Movement
across short distances, say within the cell, across the membranes and from
cell to cell within the tissue has also to take place. To understand some of
the transport processes that take place in plants, one would have to recollect
one’s basic knowledge about the structure of the cell and the anatomy of
the plant body. We also need to revisit our understanding of diffusion,
besides gaining some knowledge about chemical potential and ions.

When we talk of the movement of substances we need first to define
what kind of movement we are talking about, and also what substances
we are looking at. In a ﬂowering plant the substances that would need to
be transported are water, mineral nutrients, organic nutrients and plant
growth regulators. Over small distances substances move by diffusion
and by cytoplasmic streaming supplemented by active transport.
Transport over longer distances proceeds through the vascular system
(the xylem and the phloem) and is called translocation.

An important aspect that needs to be considered is the direction of
transport. In rooted plants, transport in xylem (of water and minerals) is
essentially unidirectional, from roots to the stems. Organic and mineral
nutrients however, undergo multidirectional transport. Organic

2019-2020