BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION

 

bicuspid valves due to attempted backﬂow of blood into the atria. As
the ventricular pressure increases further, the semilunar valves guarding
the pulmonary artery (right side) and the aorta (left side) are forced open,
allowing the blood in the ventricles to ﬂow through these vessels into
the circulatory pathways. The ventricles now relax (ventricular diastole)
and the ventricular pressure falls causing the closure of semilunar valves
which prevents the backﬂow of blood into the ventricles. As the
ventricular pressure declines further, the tricuspid and bicuspid valves
are pushed open by the pressure in the atria exerted by the blood which
was being emptied into them by the veins. The blood now once again
moves freely to the ventricles. The ventricles and atria are now again in
a relaxed (joint diastole) state, as earlier. Soon the SAN generates a new
action potential and the events described above are repeated in that
sequence and the process continues.

This sequential event in the heart which is cyclically repeated is called
the cardiac cycle and it consists of systole and diastole of both the atria
and ventricles. As mentioned earlier, the heart beats 72 times per minute,
i.e., that many cardiac cycles are performed per minute. From this it could
be deduced that the duration of a cardiac cycle is 0.8 seconds. During a
cardiac cycle, each ventricle pumps out approximately 70 mL of blood
which is called the stroke volume. The stroke volume multiplied by the
heart rate (no. of beats per min.) gives the cardiac output. Therefore, the
cardiac output can be deﬁned as the volume of blood pumped out by each
ventricle per minute and averages 5000 mL or 5 litres in a healthy individual.
The body has the ability to alter the stroke volume as well as the heart rate
and thereby the cardiac output. For example, the cardiac output of an
athlete will be much higher than that of an ordinary man.

During each cardiac cycle two prominent sounds are produced which
can be easily heard through a stethoscope. The ﬁrst heart sound (lub) is
associated with the closure of the tricuspid and bicuspid valves whereas
the second heart sound (dub) is associated with the closure of the
semilunar valves. These sounds are of clinical diagnostic signiﬁcance.

18.3.3 Electrocardiograph (ECG)

You are probably familiar with this scene from a typical hospital television
show: A patient is hooked up to a monitoring machine that shows voltage
traces on a screen and makes the sound .. pip... pip... pip .....
peeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee” as the patient goes into cardiac arrest. This type
of machine (electro-cardiograph) is used to obtain an electrocardiogram
(ECG). ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the
heart during a cardiac cycle. To obtain a standard ECG (as shown in the