PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

The growth rate shows an increase that may be
arithmetic or geometrical (Figure 15.4).

In arithmetic growth, following mitotic cell
division, only one daughter cell continues to divide
while the other differentiates and matures. The
simplest expression of arithmetic growth is
exempliﬁed by a root elongating at a constant rate.
Look at Figure 15.5. On plotting the length of the
organ against time, a linear curve is obtained.
Mathematically, it is expressed as

E=g+n

Lt = length at time ‘t’

L0 = length at time ‘zero’

r = growth rate / elongation per unit time.

Let us now see what happens in geometrical
growth. In most systems, the initial growth is slow
(lag phase), and it increases rapidly thereafter — at
an exponential rate (log or exponential phase). Here,
both the progeny cells following mitotic cell division
retain the ability to divide and continue to do so.
However, with limited nutrient supply, the growth
slows down leading to a stationary phase. If we plot
the parameter of growth against time, we get a typical
sigmoid or S—curve (Figure 15.6). A sigmoid curve
is a characteristic of living organism growing in a
natural environment. It is typical for all cells, tissues
and organs of a plant. Can you think of more similar
examples? What kind of a curve can you expect in
a tree showing seasonal activities?

The exponential growth can be expressed as

W1 = WO ert

W1 = ﬁnal size (weight, height, number etc.)
WO = initial size at the beginning of the period
r = growth rate

t = time of growth

e = base of natural logarithms

Here, r is the relative growth rate and is also the
measure of the ability of the plant to produce new
plant material, referred to as efficiency index. Hence,
the ﬁnal size of W1 depends on the initial size, W0.

243

Height of the plant

 

Figure 15.5 Constant linear growth, a plot
of length L against time t

Stationary phase

Size/weight of the organ

Lag phase

 

Time

Figure 15.6 An idealised sigmoid growth
curve typical of cells in culture,
and many higher plants and
plant organs