298

 

BIOLOGY

to initiate the contraction of smooth muscles of the bladder and
simultaneous relaxation of the urethral sphincter causing the release of
urine. The process of release of urine is called micturition and the neural
mechanisms causing it is called the micturition reﬂex. An adult human
excretes, on an average, 1 to 1.5 litres of urine per day. The urine formed
is a light yellow coloured watery ﬂuid which is slightly acidic (pH-6.0)
and has a characterestic odour. On an average, 25-30 gm of urea is
excreted out per day. Various conditions can affect the characteristics of
urine. Analysis of urine helps in clinical diagnosis of many metabolic
discorders as well as malfunctioning of the kidney. For example, presence
of glucose (Glycosuria) and ketone bodies (Ketonuria) in urine are
indicative of diabetes mellitus.

19.7 ROLE OF OTHER ORGANS IN EXCRETION

Other than the kidneys, lungs, liver and skin also help in the elimination
of excretory wastes.

Our lungs remove large amounts of CO2 (approximately 200mL/
minute) and also signiﬁcant quantities of water every day. Liver, the largest
gland in our body, secretes bile-containing substances like bilirubin,
biliverdin, cholesterol, degraded steroid hormones, vitamins and drugs.
Most of these substances ultimately pass out alongwith digestive wastes.

The sweat and sebaceous glands in the skin can eliminate certain
substances through their secretions. Sweat produced by the sweat
glands is a watery ﬂuid containing NaCl, small amounts of urea, lactic
acid, etc. Though the primary function of sweat is to facilitate a cooling
effect on the body surface, it also helps in the removal of some of the
wastes mentioned above. Sebaceous glands eliminate certain
substances like sterols, hydrocarbons and waxes through sebum. This
secretion provides a protective oily covering for the skin. Do you know
that small amounts of nitrogenous wastes could be eliminated through
saliva too?

19.8 DISORDERS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM

Malfunctioning of kidneys can lead to accumulation of urea in blood, a
condition called uremia, which is highly harmful and may lead to kidney
failure. In such patients, urea can be removed by a process called
hemodialysis. During the process of haemodialysis, the blood drained
from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing unit called artiﬁcial
kidney. Blood drained from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing
unit after adding an anticoagulant like heparin. The unit contains a coiled
cellophane tube surrounded by a ﬂuid (dialysing ﬂuid) having the same