248

 

BIOLOGY

The ‘bakanae’ (foolish seedling) disease of rice seedlings, was caused
by a fungal pathogen Gibberellafujikuroi. E. Kurosawa (1926) reported
the appearance of symptoms of the disease in rice seedlings when they
were treated with sterile ﬁltrates of the fungus. The active substances
were later identiﬁed as gibberellic acid.

F. Skoog and his co-workers observed that from the internodal
segments of tobacco stems the callus (a mass of undifferentiated cells)
proliferated only if, in addition to auxins the nutrients medium was
supplemented with one of the following: extracts of vascular tissues, yeast
extract, coconut milk or DNA. Miller et al. (1955), later identiﬁed and
crystallised the cytokinesis promoting active substance that they
termed kinetin.

During mid- 1960s, three independent researches reported the
puriﬁcation and chemical characterisation of three different kinds of
inhibitors: inhibitor-B, abscission II and dormin. Later all the three were
proved to be chemically identical. It was named abscisic acid (ABA).

H.H. Cousins (19 10) conﬁrmed the release of a volatile substance from
ripened oranges that hastened the ripening of stored unripened bananas.
Later this volatile substance was identiﬁed as ethylene, a gaseous PGR.

Let us study some of the physiological effects of these ﬁve categories
of PGRs in the next section.

15.4.3 Physiological Effects of Plant Growth Regulators
15.4.3.1 Auxins

Auxins (from Greek ‘auxein’ : to grow) was ﬁrst isolated from human urine.
The term ‘auxin’ is applied to the indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and to other
natural and synthetic compounds having certain growth regulating
properties. They are generally produced by the growing apices of the stems
and roots, from where they migrate to the regions of their action. Auxins
like IAA and indole butyric acid (IBA) have been isolated from plants.
NAA (naphthalene acetic acid) and 2, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic)
are synthetic auxins. All these auxins have been used extensively in
agricultural and horticultural practices.

They help to initiate rooting in stem cuttings, an application widely
used for plant propagation. Auxins promote ﬂowering e. g. in pineapples.
They help to prevent fruit and leaf drop at early stages but promote the
abscission of older mature leaves and fruits.

In most higher plants, the growing apical bud inhibits the growth of
the lateral (axillary) buds, a phenomenon called apical dominance.
Removal of shoot tips (decapitation) usually results in the growth of lateral
buds (Figure 15. 1 1). It is widely applied in tea plantations, hedge-making.
Can you explain why?