294

 

BIOLOGY

The amount of the ﬁltrate formed by the kidneys per minute is called
glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR in a healthy individual is
approximately 125 ml/ minute, i.e., 180 litres per day !

The lddneys have built-in mechanisms for the regulation of glomerular
ﬁltration rate. One such efﬁcient mechanism is carried out by juxta
glomerular apparatus (J GA). J GA is a special sensitive region formed by
cellular modiﬁcations in the distal convoluted tubule and the afferent
arteriole at the location of their contact. A fall in GFR can activate the JG
cells to release renin which can stimulate the glomerular blood ﬂow and
thereby the GFR back to normal.

A comparison of the volume of the ﬁltrate formed per day (1 80 litres
per day) with that of the urine released (1.5 litres), suggest that nearly 99
per cent of the ﬁltrate has to be reabsorbed by the renal tubules. This
process is called reabsorption. The tubular epithelial cells in different
segments of nephron perform this either by active or passive mechanisms.
For example, substances like glucose, amino acids, Na’“, etc., in the ﬁltrate
are reabsorbed actively whereas the nitrogenous wastes are absorbed by
passive transport. Reabsorption of water also occurs passively in the initial
segments of the nephron (Figure 19.5).

During urine formation, the tubular cells secrete substances like H’“,
K+ and ammonia into the ﬁltrate. Tubular secretion is also an important
step in urine formation as it helps in the maintenance of ionic and acid
base balance of body ﬂuids.

19.3 FUNCTION or THE TUBULEs

Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT): PCT is lined by simple cuboidal
brush border epithelium which increases the surface area for reabsorption.
Nearly all of the essential nutrients, and 70-80 per cent of electrolytes
and water are reabsorbed by this segment. PCT also helps to maintain
the pH and ionic balance of the body ﬂuids by selective secretion of
hydrogen ions, ammonia and potassium ions into the ﬁltrate and by
absorption of HCOS‘ from it.

Henle’s Loop: Reabsorption is minimum in its ascending limb.
However, this region plays a signiﬁcant role in the maintenance of high
osmolarity of medullary interstitial ﬂuid. The descending limb of loop of
Henle is permeable to water but almost impermeable to electrolytes. This
concentrates the filtrate as it moves down. The ascending limb is
impermeable to water but allows transport of electrolytes actively or
passively. Therefore, as the concentrated ﬁltrate pass upward, it gets
diluted due to the passage of electrolytes to the medullary ﬂuid.

Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT): Conditional reabsorption of Na+
and water takes place in this segment. DCT is also capable of reabsorption
of HCOs‘ and selective secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions and
NH3 to maintain the pH and sodium-potassium balance in blood.