REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS

In some algae the two gametes are so similar in appearance
that it is not possible to categorise them into male and female gametes.
They are hence called homogametes (isogametes) (Figure 1.5a).
However, in a majority of sexually reproducing organisms the gametes
produced are of two morphologically distinct types (heterogametes). In
such organisms the male gamete is called the antherozoid or sperm
and the female gamete is called the egg or ovum (Figure1.5 b, c).

Sexuality in organisms: Sexual reproduction in organisms generally
involves the fusion of gametes from two different individuals. But this
is not always true. From your recollection of examples studied in
Class XI, can you identify cases where self-fertilisation is observed? Of
course, citing such examples in plants is easy.

Plants may have both male and female reproductive structures in the
same plant (bisexual) (Figure 1.6 c, e) or on different plants (unisexual)
(Figure 1.6 d). In several fungi and plants, terms such as homothallic
and monoecious are used to denote the bisexual condition and
heterothallic and dioecious are the terms used to describe unisexual
condition. In ﬂowering plants, the unisexual male ﬂower is staminate,
i.e., bearing stamens, while the female is pistillate or bearing pistils. In
some ﬂowering plants, both male and female ﬂowers may be present on
the same individual (monoecious) or on separate individuals (dioecious).
Some examples of monoecious plants are cucurbits and coconuts and of
dioecious plants are papaya and date palm. Name the type of gametes
that are formed in staminate and pistillate ﬂowers.

But what about animals? Are individuals of all species either male or
female (unisexual)? Or are there species which possess both the
reproductive organs (bisexual)? You probably can make a list
of several unisexual animal species. Earthworms, (Figure 1.6 a) sponge,
tapeworm and leech, typical examples of bisexual animals that possess
both male and female reproductive organs, are hermaphrodites.
Cockroach (Figure 1.6b) is an example of a unisexual species.

Cell division during gamete formation : Gametes in all heterogametic
species are of two types namely, male and female. Gametes are haploid
though the parent plant body from which they arise may be either haploid
or diploid. A haploid parent produces gametes by mitotic division. Does
this mean that meiosis never occurs in organisms that are haploid?
Carefully examine the ﬂow charts of life cycles of algae that you have
studied in Class XI (Chapter 3) to get a suitable answer.

Several organisms belonging to monera, fungi, algae and bryophytes
have haploid plant body, but in organisms belonging to pteridophytes,
gymnosperms, angiosperms and most of the animals including human
beings, the parental body is diploid. It is obvious that meiosis, the reduction
division, has to occur if a diploid body has to produce haploid gametes.

2019-2020