SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN FLOWERING PLANTS

2.2. 1 Stamen, Microsporangium and Pollen Grain

Figure 2.2a shows the two parts of a typical stamen - the long and slender
stalk called the ﬁlament, and the terminal generally bilobed structure
called the anther. The proximal end of the ﬁlament
is attached to the thalamus or the petal of the ﬂower.
The number and length of stamens are variable in
ﬂowers of different species. If you were to collect a
stamen each from ten ﬂowers (each from different
species) and arrange them on a slide, you would
be able to appreciate the large variation in size seen
in nature. Careful observation of each stamen
under a dissecting microscope and making neat
diagrams would elucidate the range in shape and
attachment of anthers in different ﬂowers.

A typical angiosperm anther is bilobed with
each lobe having two theca, i.e., they are dithecous
(Figure 2.2 b). Often a longitudinal groove runs
lengthwise separating the theca. Let us
understand the various types of tissues and their
organisation in the transverse section of an anther
(Figure 2.3 a). The bilobed nature of an anther is
very distinct in the transverse section of the anther.
The anther is a four-sided (tetragonal) structure
consisting of four microsporangia located at the
corners, two in each lobe.

The microsporangia develop further and
become pollen sacs. They extend longitudinally

— Filament
(stalk)

(a)

    
      

Pollen grains

all through the length of an anther and are packed Figure 2.2 (a) A typical stamen;
with pollen grains. (b) three—dimensional cut section

Structure of microsporangium: In a transverse
section, a typical microsporangium appears near
circular in outline. It is generally surrounded by four wall layers (Figure
2.3 b)— the epidermis, endothecium, middle layers and the tapetum. The
outer three wall layers perform the function of protection and help in
dehiscence of anther to release the pollen. The innermost wall layer is
the tapetum. It nourishes the developing pollen grains. Cells of the
tapetum possess dense cytoplasm and generally have more than one
nucleus. Can you think of how tapetal cells could become bi-nucleate?

When the anther is young, a group of compactly arranged homogenous
cells called the sporogenous tissue occupies the centre of each
microsporangium.

Microsporogenesis : As the anther develops, the cells of the sporogenous
tissue undergo meiotic divisions to form microspore tetrads. What would
be the ploidy of the cells of the tetrad?

2019—2020

of an anther