PLANT KINGDOM

The gymnosperms are heterosporous; they produce
haploid microspores and megaspores. The two kinds of
spores are produced within sporangia that are borne
on sporophst which are arranged spirally along an axis
to form lax or compact strobili or cones. ’Ihe strobili
bearing microsporophylls and microsporangia are
called microsporangiate or male strobili. The
microspores develop into a male gametophytic
generation which is highly reduced and is conﬁned to
only a limited number of cells. This reduced
gametophyte is called a pollen grain. The development
of pollen grains take place within the microsporangia.
The cones bearing megasporophylls with ovules or
megasporangia are called macrosporangiate or female
strobili. The male or female cones or strobili may be
borne on the same tree (Pinus). However, in cycas male
cones and megasporophst are bome on different trees.
The megaspore mother cell is differentiated from one of
the cells of the nucellus. The nucellus is protected by
envelopes and the composite structure is called an
ovule. ’Ihe ovules are borne on megasporophylls which
may be clustered to form the female cones. The
megaspore mother cell divides meiotically to form four
megaspores. One of the megaspores enclosed within the
megasporangium develops into a multicellular female
gametophyte that bears two or more archegonia or
female sex organs. The multicellular female gametophyte
is also retained within megasporangium.

Unlike bryophytes and pteridophytes, in
gymnosperms the male and the female gametophytes
do not have an independent free-living existence. They
remain within the sporangia retained on the
sporophytes. ’Ihe pollen grain is released from the
microsporangium. They are carried in air currents and
come in contact with the opening of the ovules borne
on megasporophylls. The pollen tube carrying the
male gametes grows towards archegonia in the ovules
and discharge their contents near the mouth of the
archegonia. Following fertilisation, zygote develops
into an embryo and the ovules into seeds. These seeds
are not covered.

201 9-2020

39

 

Long Shoot

 

(C)

Figure 3.4 Gymnosperms: (a) Cycas
(b) Pinus (c) Ginkgo