BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION

 

18.1 .3.2 Rh grouping

Another antigen, the Rh antigen similar to one present in Rhesus monkeys
(hence Rh), is also observed on the surface of RBCs of majority (nearly 80
per cent) of humans. Such individuals are called Rh positive (Rh+ve)
and those in whom this antigen is absent are called Rh negative mh-ve).
An Rh-ve person, if exposed to Rh+ve blood, will form speciﬁc antibodies
against the Rh antigens. Therefore, Rh group should also be matched
before transfusions. A special case of Rh incompatibility (mismatching)
has been observed between the Rh-ve blood of a pregnant mother with
Rh+ve blood of the foetus. Rh antigens of the foetus do not get exposed to
the Rh-ve blood of the mother in the ﬁrst pregnancy as the two bloods are
well separated by the placenta. However, during the delivery of the ﬁrst
child, there is a possibility of exposure of the maternal blood to small
amounts of the Rh+ve blood from the foetus. In such cases, the mother
starts preparing antibodies against Rh antigen in her blood. In case of
her subsequent pregnancies, the Rh antibodies from the mother (Rh-ve)
can leak into the blood of the foetus (Rh+ve) and destroy the foetal RBCs.
This could be fatal to the foetus or could cause severe anaemia and
jaundice to the baby. This condition is called erythroblastosis foetalis.
This can be avoided by administering anti-Rh antibodies to the mother
immediately after the delivery of the ﬁrst child.

18. 1.4 Coagulation of Blood

You know that when you cut your ﬁnger or hurt yourself, your wound
does not continue to bleed for a long time; usually the blood stops ﬂowing
after sometime. Do you know why? Blood exhibits coagulation or clotting
in response to an injury or trauma. This is a mechanism to prevent
excessive loss of blood from the body. You would have observed a dark
reddish brown scum formed at the site of a cut or an injury over a period
of time. It is a clot or coagulam formed mainly of a network of threads
called ﬁbrins in which dead and damaged formed elements of blood are
trapped. Fibrins are formed by the conversion of inactive ﬁbrinogens in
the plasma by the enzyme thrombin. Thrombins, in turn are formed from
another inactive substance present in the plasma called prothrombin. An
enzyme complex, thrombokinase, is required for the above reaction. This
complex is formed by a series of linked enzymic reactions (cascade
process) involving a number of factors present in the plasma in an inactive
state. An injury or a trauma stimulates the platelets in the blood to release
certain factors which activate the mechanism of coagulation. Certain
factors released by the tissues at the site of injury also can initiate
coagulation. Calcium ions play a very important role in clotting.