BIOLOGY

in temperate countries like Canada and Germany, snow leopards are not
found in Kerala forests and tuna ﬁsh are rarely caught beyond tropical
latitudes in the ocean. You can appreciate the signiﬁcance of temperature
to living organisms when you realise that it affects the kinetics of enzymes
and through it the metabolic activity and other physiological functions of
the organism. A few organisms can tolerate and thrive in a wide range of
temperatures (they are called eurythermal), but, a vast majority of them
are restricted to a narrow range of temperatures (such organisms are called
stenothermal). The levels of thermal tolerance of different species determine
to a large extent their geographical distribution. Can you think of a few
eurythermal and stenothermal animals and plants?

In recent years, there has been a growing concern about the gradually
increasing average global temperatures (Chapter 1 6). If this trend continues,
would you expect the distributional range of some species to be affected?

Water: Water is another the most important factor inﬂuencing the life of
organisms. In fact, life on earth originated in water and is unsustainable
without water. Its availability is so limited in deserts that only special
adaptations make it possible for organisms to live there. The productivity
and distribution of plants is also heavily dependent on water. You might
think that organisms living in oceans, lakes and rivers should not face
any water-related problems, but it is not true. For aquatic organisms the
quality (chemical composition, pH) of water becomes important. The salt
concentration (measured as salinity in parts per thousand), is less than
5 in inland waters, 30-35 in the sea and > 100 in some hypersaline
lagoons. Some organisms are tolerant of a wide range of salinities
(euryhaline) but others are restricted to a narrow range (stenohaline).
Many freshwater animals cannot live for long in sea water and vice versa
because of the osmotic problems, they would face.

Light: Since plants produce food through photosynthesis, a process which
is only possible when sunlight is available as a source of energy, we can
quickly understand the importance of light for living organisms,
particularly autotrophs. Many species of small plants (herbs and shrubs)
growing in forests are adapted to photosynthesise optimally under very
low light conditions because they are constantly overshadowed by tall,
canopied trees. Many plants are also dependent on sunlight to meet their
photoperiodic requirement for ﬂowering. For many animals too, light is
important in that they use the diurnal and seasonal variations in light
intensity and duration (photoperiod) as cues for timing their foraging,
reproductive and migratory activities. The availability of light on land is
closely linked with that of temperature since the sun is the source for both.
But, deep (>500m) in the oceans, the environment is dark and its inhabitants
are not aware of the existence of a celestial source of energy called Sun.
What, then is their source of energy?. The spectral quality of solar radiation
is also important for life. The UV component of the spectrum is harmful to
many organisms while not all the colour components of the visible spectrum

2019-2020