NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION

swollen and is called ampulla, which contains a projecting ridge called
crista ampullaris which has hair cells. The saccule and utricle contain a
projecting ridge called macula. The crista and macula are the speciﬁc
receptors of the vestibular apparatus responsible for maintenance of
balance of the body and posture.

20.6.2.1 Mechanism of Hearing

How does ear convert sound waves into neural impulses, which are
sensed and processed by the brain enabling us to recognise a sound ?
The external ear receives sound waves and directs them to the ear drum.
The ear drum vibrates in response to the sound waves and these vibrations
are transmitted through the ear ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) to
the oval window. The vibrations are passed through the oval window on
to the ﬂuid of the cochlea, where they generate waves in the lymphs. The
waves in the lymphs induce a ripple in the basilar membrane. These
movements of the basilar membrane bend the hair cells, pressing them
against the tectorial membrane. As a result, nerve impulses are generated
in the associated afferent neurons. These impulses are transmitted by
the afferent ﬁbres via auditory nerves to the auditory cortex of the brain,
where the impulses are analysed and the sound is recognised.

SUMMARY

The neural system coordinates and integrates functions as well as metabolic
and homeostatic activities of all the organs. Neurons, the functional units of
neural system are excitable cells due to a differential concentration gradient of
ions across the membrane. The elT‘levglrical potential difference across the resting
neural membrane is called the, ‘resting potential’. The nerve impulse is conducted
along the axon membrgim ‘ in the form of a wave of depolarisation and
repolarisation. A synap‘é’e‘i’s formed by the membranes of a pre-synaptic neuron
and a post-synaptic neuron which may or may not be separated by a gap called
synaptic cleft. Chemicals involved in the transmission of impulses at chemical
synapses are called neurotransmitters.

Human neural system consists of two parts : (i) central neural system (CNS)
and (ii) the peripheral neural system. The CNS consists of the brain and spiral
cord. The brain can be divided into three major parts : (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain
and (iii) hindbrain. The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and
hypothalamus. The cerebrum is longitudinally divided into two halves that are
connected by the corpus callosum. A very important part of the forebrain called

hypothalamus controls the body temperature, eating and drinking. Inner parts

 

327