DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

like structure called stomach. A muscular
sphincter (gastro-oesophageal) regulates the
opening of oesophagus into the stomach.
The stomach, located in the upper left
portion of the abdominal cavity, has four
major parts — a cardiac portion into which
the oesophagus opens, a fundic region, body
(main central region) and a pyloric portion
which opens into the ﬁrst part of small
intestine (Figure 16.3). Small intestine is
distinguishable into three regions, a ‘C’
shaped duodenum, a long coiled middle
portion jejunum and a highly coiled ileum.
The opening of the stomach into the
duodenum is guarded by the pyloric
sphincter. Ileum opens into the large
intestine. It consists of caecum, colon and
rectum. Caecum is a small blind sac which
hosts some symbiotic micro-organisms. A
narrow ﬁnger-like tubular projection, the
vermiform appendix which is a vestigial
organ, arises from the caecum. The caecum
opens into the colon. The colon is divided
into four parts — an ascending, a transverse,
descending part and a sigmoid colon. The
descending part opens into the rectum
which opens out through the anus.

The wall of alimentary canal from
oesophagus to rectum possesses four layers
(Figure 16.4) namely serosa, muscularis,
sub-mucosa and mucosa. Serosa is the
outermost layer and is made up of a thin
mesothelium (epithelium of visceral organs)
with some connective tissues. Muscularis is
formed by smooth muscles usually
arranged into an inner circular and an outer
longitudinal layer. An oblique muscle layer
may be present in some regions. The sub-
mucosal layer is formed of loose connective
tissues containing nerves, blood and lymph
vessels. In duodenum, glands are also
present in sub-mucosa. The innermost
layer lining the lumen of the alimentary
canal is the mucosa. This layer forms
irregular folds (rugae) in the stomach and
small ﬁnger-like foldings called villi in the
small intestine (Figure 1 6.5). The cells lining
the villi produce numerous microscopic

i2

 

Figure 16.2 Arrangement of different types of
teeth in the jaws on one side and
the sockets on the other side

Ocsophagus

 
   
  
   

Fund! 15

Cardiac
Supe rior portion

of duodenum
Body

Pylorit‘

Figure 16.3 Anatomical regions of human
stomach