BIOMOLECULES 159

Isomerases: Includes all enzymes catalysing inter-conversion of optical,
geometric or positional isomers.

Ligases: Enzymes catalysing the linking together of 2 compounds, e. g.,
enzymes which catalyse joining of C-0, C-S, C-N, P-O etc. bonds.

9. 12.6 Co-factors

Enzymes are composed of one or several polypeptide chains. However,
there are a number of cases in which non-protein constituents called co-
factors are bound to the the enzyme to make the enzyme catalytically
active. In these instances, the protein portion of the enzymes is called the
apoenzyme. Three kinds of cofactors may be identiﬁed: prosthetic groups,
co-enzymes and metal ions.

Prosthetic groups are organic compounds and are distinguished from
other cofactors in that they are tightly bound to the apoenzyme. For
example, in peroxidase and catalase, which catalyze the breakdown of
hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen, haem is the prosthetic group
and it is a part of the active site of the enzyme.

Co-enzymes are also organic compounds but their association with
the apoenzyme is only transient, usually occurring during the course of
catalysis. Furthermore, co-enzymes serve as co-factors in a number of
different enzyme catalyzed reactions. The essential chemical components
of many coenzymes are vitamins, e. g., coenzyme nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) and NADP contain the vitamin niacin.

A number of enzymes require metal ions for their activity which form
coordination bonds with side chains at the active site and at the same
time form one or more cordination bonds with the substrate, e. g., zinc is
a cofactor for the proteolytic enzyme carboxypeptidase.

Catalytic activity is lost when the co-factor is removed from the enzyme
which testiﬁes that they play a crucial role in the catalytic activity of the

enzyme.

SUMMARY

Although there is a bewildering diversity of living organisms, their chemical
composition and metabolic reactions appear to be remarkably similar. The
elemental composition of living tissues and non-living matter appear also to be
similar when analysed qualitatively. However, a closer examination reveals that
the relative abundance of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen is higher in living systems
when compared to inanimate matter. The most abundant chemical in living
organisms is water. There are thousands of small molecular weight (< 1000 Da)