ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

this magnitude when human beings sacriﬁced their lives for the cause of
the environment. The Government of India has recently instituted the
Amrita Devi Bishnoi Wildlife Protection Award for individuals or
communities from rural areas that have shown extraordinary courage
and dedication in protecting wildlife.

You may have heard of the Chipko Movement of Garhwal Himalayas.
In 1974, local women showed enormous bravery in protecting trees from
the axe of contractors by hugging them. People all over the world have
acclaimed the Chipko movement.

Realising the signiﬁcance of participation by local communities,
the Government of India in 1980s has introduced the concept of
Joint Forest Management (JFM) so as to work closely with the local
communities for protecting and managing forests. In return for their
services to the forest, the communities get beneﬁt of various forest products
(e.g., fruits, gum, rubber, medicine, etc.), and thus the forest can be
conserved in a sustainable manner.

 

 

SUMMARY

Major issues relating to environmental pollution and depletion of
valuable natural resources vary in dimension from local, regional to
global levels. Air pollution primarily results from burning of fossil fuel,
e.g., coal and petroleum, in industries and in automobiles. They are
harmful to humans, animals and plants, and therefore must be removed
to keep our air clean. Domestic sewage, the most common source of
pollution of water bodies, reduces dissolved oxygen but increases
biochemical oxygen demand of receiving water. Domestic sewage is rich
in nutrients, especially, nitrogen and phosphorus, which cause
eutrophication and nuisance creating algal blooms. Industrial waste
waters are often rich in toxic chemicals, especially heavy metals and
organic compounds. Industrial waste waters harm living organisms.
Municipal solid wastes also create problems and must be disposed off
in landﬁlls. Disposal of hazardous wastes like defunct ships, radioactive
wastes and e-wastes requires additional efforts. Soil pollution primarily
results from agricultural chemicals (e. g., pesticides) and leachates from
solid wastes deposited over it.

Two major environmental issues of global nature are increasing
greenhouse effect, which is warming Earth, and depletion of ozone in
the stratosphere. Enhanced greenhouse effect is mainly due to
increased emission of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFCs.,

and also due to deforestation. It may drastically change rainfall pattern,
global temperature, besides deleteriously affecting living organisms.
Ozone in the stratosphere, which protects us from harmful effects of
ultraviolet radiation, is depleting fast due to emission of CFCs thus

MW

 

 

increasing the risks of skin cancer, mutation and other disorders.

 

 

 

 

2019-2020