PRINCIPLES OF INHERITANCE AND VARIATION

Sutton and Boveri argued that the pairing and separation of a
pair of chromosomes would lead to the segregation of a pair of
factors they carried. Sutton united the knowledge of chromosomal
segregation with Mendelian principles and called it the
chromosomal theory of inheritance.

Following this synthesis of ideas, experimental verification of
the chromosomal theory of inheritance by Thomas Hunt Morgan
and his colleagues, led to discovering the basis for the variation

fruit ﬂies, Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 5.10), which were
found very suitable for such studies. They could be grown on
simple synthetic medium in the laboratory. They complete their life
cycle in about two weeks, and a single mating could produce a large
number of progeny ﬂies. Also, there was a clear differentiation of the
sexes — the male and female ﬂies are easily distinguishable. Also, it
has many types of hereditary variations that can be seen with low
power microscopes.

5.3.3 Linkage and Recombination

Morgan carried out several dihybrid crosses in Drosophila to study genes
that were sex-linked. ’Ihe crosses were similar to the dihybrid crosses carried
out by Mendel in peas. For example Morgan hybridised yellow-bodied,
white-eyed females to brown-bodied, red-eyed males and intercrossed their
F1 progeny. He observed that the two genes did not segregate independently
of each other and the F2 ratio deviated very signiﬁcantly from the 913:3: 1
ratio (expected when the two genes are independent).

Morgan and his group knew that the genes were located on the X
chromosome (Section 5.4) and saw quickly that when the two genes in a
dihybrid cross were situated on the same chromosome, the proportion
of parental gene combinations were much higher than the non-parental
type. Morgan attributed this due to the physical association or linkage
of the two genes and coined the term linkage to describe this physical
association of genes on a chromosome and the term recombination to
describe the generation of non-parental gene combinations (Figure 5.1 1).
Morgan and his group also found that even when genes were grouped
on the same chromosome, some genes were very tightly linked (showed
very low recombination) (Figure 5.1 1, Cross A) while others were loosely
linked (showed higher recombination) (Figure 5.1 1, Cross B). For
example he found that the genes white and yellow were very tightly linked
and showed only 1.3 per cent recombination while white and miniature
wing showed 37.2 per cent recombination. His student Alfred
Sturtevant used the frequency of recombination between gene pairs
on the same chromosome as a measure of the distance between genes
and ‘mapped’ their position on the chromosome. Today genetic maps

2019-2020

(a) (b)

that sexual reproduction produced. Morgan worked with the tiny Figure 5. 10 Drosophila
melanogaster (a) Male

(b) Female

83