ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS

 

narrow cavities (lumen). These are commonly found in the fruit
walls of nuts; pulp of fruits like guava, pear and sapota; seed
coats of legumes and leaves of tea. Sclerenchyma provides
mechanical support to organs.

6.1 .2.2 Complex Tissues

The complex tissues are made of more than one type of cells
and these work together as a unit. Xylem and phloem constitute
the complex tissues in plants (Figure 6.3).

Xylem functions as a conducting tissue for water and
minerals from roots to the stem and leaves. It also provides
mechanical strength to the plant parts. It is composed of four
different kinds of elements, namely, tracheids, vessels, xylem
ﬁbres and xylem parenchyma. Gymnosperms lack vessels in
their xylem. Tracheids are elongated or tube like cells with
thick and ligniﬁed walls and tapering ends. These are dead and
are without protoplasm. The inner layers of the cell walls have
thickenings which vary in form. In ﬂowering plants, tracheids
and vessels are the main water transporting elements. Vessel is
a long cylindrical tube-like structure made up of many cells
called vessel members, each with ligniﬁed walls and a large
central cavity. The vessel cells are also devoid of protoplasm.
Vessel members are interconnected through perforations in their
common walls. The presence of vessels is a characteristic feature
of angiosperms. Xylem ﬁbres have highly thickened walls and
obliterated central lumens. These may either be septate or
aseptate. Xylem parenchyma cells are living and thin-walled,
and their cell walls are made up of cellulose. They store food
materials in the form of starch or fat, and other substances like
tannins. The radial conduction of water takes place by the ray
parenchymatous cells.

Primary xylem is of two types — protoxylem and metaxylem.
The ﬁrst formed primary xylem elements are called protoxylem
and the later formed primary xylem is called metaxylem. In
stems, the protoxylem lies towards the centre (pith) and the
metaxylem lies towards the periphery of the organ. This type
of primary xylem is called endarch. In roots, the protoxylem
lies towards periphery and metaxylem lies towards the centre.
Such arrangement of primary xylem is called exarch.

Phloem transports food materials, usually from leaves to
other parts of the plant. Phloem in angiosperms is composed
of sieve tube elements, companion cells, phloem parenchyma

Tracheid
Vessels

   

  
  
 

Sieve pore

Sieve tube
element
Phloem
parenchyma
Companion
cell

(b)

Figure 6.3 (a) Xylem
(b) Phloem