310

 
  

Cervical vertebra

Thoracic
vertebra

Lumbar
vertebra

Figure 20.7 Vertebral column (right lateral view)

Floating ribsl-ﬂl

Figure 20.8 Ribs and rib cage

BIOLOGY

vertebral column with the help of two occipital
condyles (dicondylic skull).

Our vertebral column (Figure 20.7) is
formed by 26 serially arranged units called
vertebrae and is dorsally placed. It extends from
the base of the skull and constitutes the main
framework of the trunk. Each vertebra has a
central hollow portion (neural canal) through
which the spinal cord passes. First vertebra is
the atlas and it articulates with the occipital
condyles. The vertebral column is differentiated
into cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral
(1 -fused) and coccygeal (l-fused) regions
starting from the skull. The number of cervical
vertebrae are seven in almost all mammals
including human beings. The vertebral column
protects the spinal cord, supports the head and
serves as the point of attachment for the ribs
and musculature of the back. Sternum is a
ﬂat bone on the ventral midline of thorax.

There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each rib is a
thin ﬂat bone connected dorsally to the
vertebral column and ventrally to the sternum.
It has two articulation surfaces on its dorsal
end and is hence called bicephalic. First seven
pairs of ribs are called true ribs. Dorsally, they
are attached to the thoracic vertebrae and
ventrally connected to the sternum with the
help of hyaline cartilage. The 8th, 9th and 10th
pairs of ribs do not articulate directly with the
sternum but join the seventh rib with the help
of hyaline cartilage. These are called
vertebrochondral (false) ribs. Last 2 pairs (1 1th
and 12th) of ribs are not connected ventrally
and are therefore, called ﬂoating ribs. Thoracic
vertebrae, ribs and sternum together form the
rib cage (Figure 20.8).

The bones of the limbs alongwith their
girdles constitute the appendicular skeleton.
Each limb is made of 30 bones. The bones of
the hand (fore limb) are humerus, radius and