iii/\V

 

BIOLOGY

afforded by vaccination and immunisation. Among other diseases, AIDS
and cancer kill a large number of individuals worldwide. AIDS caused
by the human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) is fatal but can be
prevented if certain precautions are taken. Many cancers are curable if
detected early and appropriate therapeutic measures are taken. Of late,
drug and alcohol abuse among youth and adolescents is becoming
another cause of concern. Because of the addictive nature of alcohol
and drugs, and their perceived benefits like relief from stress, a person
may try taking these in the face of peer pressure, examinations-related
and competition-related stresses. In doing so, he/ she may get addicted
to them. Education about their harmful effects, counselling and seeking
immediate professional and medical help would totally relieve the

 

individual from these evils.

 

 

 

 

EXERCISES

What are the various public health measures, which you would suggest
as safeguard against infectious diseases?

2. In which way has the study of biology helped us to control infectious
diseases?

3. How does the transmission of each of the following diseases take place?
(a) Amoebiasis (b) Malaria (c) Ascariasis (d) Pneumonia

4. What measure would you take to prevent water-borne diseases?

5. Discuss with your teacher what does ‘a suitable gene’ means, in the
context of DNA vaccines.

6. Name the primary and secondary lymphoid organs.

7. The following are some well-known abbreviations, which have been
used in this chapter. Expand each one to its full form:
(a) MALT (b) CMI (c) AIDS (d) NACO
(e) HIV

8. Differentiate the following and give examples of each:
(a) Innate and acquired immunity (b) Active and passive immunity

9. Draw a well-labelled diagram of an antibody molecule.

10. What are the various routes by which transmission of human immuno-
deficiency virus takes place?

1 1. What is the mechanism by which the AIDS virus causes deficiency of
immune system of the infected person?

12. How is a cancerous cell different from a normal cell?

13. Explain what is meant by metastasis.

14. List the harmful effects caused by alcohol/ drug abuse.

15. Do you think that friends can inﬂuence one to take alcohol/drugs? If
yes, how may one protect himself/herself from such an inﬂuence?

16. Why is that once a person starts taking alcohol or drugs, it is difﬁcult
to get rid of this habit? Discuss it with your teacher.

17. In your view what motivates youngsters to take to alcohol or drugs and

how can this be avoided?

2019-2020