38

 

BIOLOGY

free-living, mostly photosynthetic thalloid gametophytes called
prothallus. These gametophytes require cool, damp, shady places to
grow. Because of this speciﬁc restricted requirement and the need for
water for fertilisation, the spread of living pteridophytes is limited and
restricted to narrow geographical regions. The gametophytes bear male
and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia, respectively.
Water is required for transfer of antherozoids — the male gametes released
from the antheridia, to the mouth of archegonium. Fusion of male gamete
with the egg present in the archegonium result in the formation of zygote.
Zygote thereafter produces a multicellular well-differentiated sporophyte
which is the dominant phase of the pteridophytes. In majority of the
pteridophytes all the spores are of similar kinds; such plants are called
homosporous. Genera like Selaginella and Salvinia which produce
two kinds of spores, macro (large) and micro (small) spores, are known
as heterosporous. The megaspores and microspores germinate and give
rise to female and male gametophytes, respectively. The female
gametophytes in these plants are retained on the parent sporophytes
for variable periods. The development of the zygotes into young embryos
take place within the female gametophytes. This event is a precursor to
the seed habit considered an important step in evolution.

The pteridophytes are further classiﬁed into four classes: Psilopsida
(Psilotum); Lycopsida (Selaginella, Lycopodium), Sphenopsida (Equisetum)
and Pteropsida (Dryopteris, Pteris, Adiantum).

3.4 GYMNOSPERMS

The gymnosperms (gymnos : naked, sperma: seeds) are plants in which
the ovules are not enclosed by any ovary wall and remain exposed, both
before and after fertilisation. The seeds that develop post-fertilisation, are
not covered, i.e., are naked. Gymnosperms include medium-sized trees
or tall trees and shrubs Wigure 3.4). One of the gymnosperms, the giant
redwood tree Sequoia is one of the tallest tree species. The roots are
generally tap roots. Roots in some genera have fungal association in the
form of mycorrhiza (Pinus), while in some others (Cycas) small specialised
roots called coralloid roots are associated with N2- ﬁxing cyanobacteria.
The stems are unbranched (Cycas) or branched (Pinus, Cedrus). The leaves
may be simple or compound. In Cycas the pinnate leaves persist for a few
years. The leaves in gymnosperms are well-adapted to withstand extremes
of temperature, humidity and wind. In conifers, the needle-like leaves
reduce the surface area. Their thick cuticle and sunken stomata also

help to reduce water loss.