£4.

178

 

liNV/IW

BIOLOGY

 

 

 

SUMMARY

Animal husbandry is the practice of taking care and breeding domestic
animals by applying scientific principles. The ever-increasing demand
of food from animals and animal products both in terms of quality and
quantity has been met by good animal husbandry practices. These
practices include (i) management of farm and farm animals, and (ii)
animal breeding. In view of the high nutritive value of honey and its
medicinal importance, there has been a remarkable growth in the practice
of bee-keeping or apiculture. Fishery is another ﬂourishing industry
meeting the ever-increasing demand for ﬁsh, fish products and other
aquatic foods.

Plant breeding may be used to create varieties, which are resistant
to pathogens and to insect pests. This increases the yield of the food.
This method has also been used to increase the protein content of the
plant foods and thereby enhance the quality of food. In India, several
varieties of different crop plants have been produced. All these measures
enhance the production of food. Techniques of tissue culture and
somatic hybridisation offer vast potential for manipulation of plants in
vitro to produce new varieties.

 

 

10.

12.

EXERCISES

1. Explain in brief the role of animal husbandry in human welfare.

2. If your family owned a dairy farm, what measures would you undertake

to improve the quality and quantity of milk production?

3. What is meant by the term ‘breed’? What are the objectives of animal

breeding?

P

of the methods is best? Why?

What is apiculture? How is it important in our lives?

Discuss the role of ﬁshery in enhancement of food production.
Brieﬂy describe various steps involved in plant breeding.
Explain what is meant by biofortification.

99051939"

why?

propagation of an explant in vitro are?

in India.

2019-2020

 

 

Name the methods employed in animal breeding. According to you which

Which part of the plant is best suited for making virus-free plants and

What is the major advantage of producing plants by micropropagation?
Find out what the various components of the medium used for

Name any five hybrid varieties of crop plants which have been developed