158

 

BIOLOGY

Concentration of Substrate

With the increase in substrate concentration, the velocity of the enzymatic
reaction rises at ﬁrst. The reaction ultimately reaches a maximum velocity
(Vmax) which is not exceeded by any further rise in concentration of the
substrate. This is because the enzyme molecules are fewer than the
substrate molecules and after saturation of these molecules, there are no
free enzyme molecules to bind with the additional substrate molecules
(Figure 9.7).

The activity of an enzyme is also sensitive to the presence of speciﬁc
chemicals that bind to the enzyme. When the binding of the chemical
shuts off enzyme activity, the process is called inhibition and the chemical
is called an inhibitor.

When the inhibitor closely resembles the substrate in its molecular
structure and inhibits the activity of the enzyme, it is known as
competitive inhibitor. Due to its close structural similarity with the
substrate, the inhibitor competes with the substrate for the substrate-
binding site of the enzyme. Consequently, the substrate cannot bind and
as a result, the enzyme action declines, e. g., inhibition of succinic
dehydrogenase by malonate which closely resembles the substrate
succinate in structure. Such competitive inhibitors are often used in the
control of bacterial pathogens.

9. 12.5 Classification and Nomenclature of Enzymes

Thousands of enzymes have been discovered, isolated and studied. Most
of these enzymes have been classiﬁed into different groups based on the

type of reactions they catalyse. Enzymes are divided into 6 classes each
with 4- 13 subclasses and named accordingly by a four-digit number.

Oxidoreductases/dehydrogenases: Enzymes which catalyse
oxidoreduction between two substrates S and S’ e. g.,

-.
T

)-. \y-"l . ~ -.'~;',... 3- #2; v “we -v. 512.46-
w: “’3’WarsawEimﬂmmﬂw—ﬁsgmﬁmlwr - -

 

Transferases: Enzymes catalysing a transfer of a group, G (other than
hydrogen) between a pair of substrate S and S’ e. g.,

Hydrolases: Enzymes catalysing hydrolysis of ester, ether, peptide,
glycosidic, C-C, C-halide or P-N bonds.

Lyases: Enzymes that catalyse removal of groups from substrates by
mechanisms other than hydrolysis leaving double bonds.

 

21‘ ‘f