MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE

disorders that affect human beings. Besides providing clues to
understanding human biology, learning about non-human organisms
DNA sequences can lead to an understanding of their natural capabilities
that can be applied toward solving challenges in health care, agriculture,
energy production, environmental remediation. Many non-human model
organisms, such as bacteria, yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans (a free living
non-pathogenic nematode), Drosophila (the fruit ﬂy), plants (rice and
Arabidopsis), etc., have also been sequenced.

Methodologies : The methods involved two major approaches. One
approach focused on identifying all the genes that are expressed as
RNA (referred to as Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs). The other took
the blind approach of simply sequencing the whole set of genome that
contained all the coding and non-coding sequence, and later assigning
different regions in the sequence with functions (a term referred to as
Sequence Annotation). For sequencing, the total DNA from a cell is
isolated and converted into random fragments of relatively smaller sizes
(recall DNA is a very long polymer, and there are technical limitations in
sequencing very long pieces of DNA) and cloned in suitable host using
specialised vectors. The cloning resulted into ampliﬁcation of each piece
of DNA fragment so that it subsequently could be sequenced with ease.
The commonly used hosts were bacteria and yeast, and the vectors were
called as BAC (bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes), and YAC (yeast artiﬁcial
chromosomes) .

The fragments were sequenced using automated DNA sequencers that
worked on the principle of a method developed by Frederick Sanger.
(Remember, Sanger is also credited for developing method for
determination of amino acid
sequences in proteins). These
sequences were then arranged based
on some overlapping regions
present in them. This required
generation of overlapping fragments
for sequencing. Alignment of these
sequences was humanly not
possible. Therefore, specialised
computer based programs were
developed (Figure 6.1 5). These
sequences were subsequently
annotated and were assigned to each
chromosome. The sequence of
chromosome 1 was completed only
in May 2006 (this was the last of the

 

 

24 human chromosomes — 22 Figure 6.15A representative diagram of human

autosomes and X and Y — to be genome project

2019-2020