230

Glyceraldehyde
3-Phosphate

NAD+

r3-Phosphoglyceric
acid

U

Phosphoéﬁgl
Pyruvic acid

Figure 14.2 Major pathways of anaerobic

NADHﬁijgizf

9' . J}

  

 

BIOLOGY

There are three major ways in which different cells handle pyruvic acid
produced by glycolysis. These are lactic acid fermentation, alcoholic
fermentation and aerobic respiration. Fermentation takes place under
anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes.
For the complete oxidation of glucose to CO2 and H20, however, organisms
adopt Krebs’ cycle which is also called as aerobic respiration. This requires

02 supply.
14.3 FERMENTATION

In fermentation, say by yeast, the incomplete oxidation of glucose is
achieved under anaerobic conditions by sets of reactions where pyruvic
acid is converted to CO2 and ethanol. The enzymes, pyruvic acid
decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase catalyse these reactions. Other
organisms like some bacteria produce lactic acid from pyruvic acid. The
steps involved are shown in Figure 14.2. In animal cells also, like muscles
during exercise, when oxygen is inadequate for cellular respiration pyruvic
acid is reduced to lactic acid by lactate dehydrogenase. The reducing
agent is NADH+H+ which is reoxidised to NAD+ in both the processes.
In both lactic acid and alcohol
fermentation not much energy is released; less
than seven per cent of the energy in glucose
is released and not all of it is trapped as high
energy bonds of ATP. Also, the processes are
hazardous — either acid or alcohol is
produced. What is the net ATPs that is
synthesised (calculate how many ATP are
synthesised and deduct the number of ATP
utilised during glycolysis) when one molecule
of glucose is fermented to alcohol or lactic
acid? Yeasts poison themselves to death when
the concentration of alcohol reaches about 13
per cent. What then would be the

   

acid

x NADH+H maximum concentration of alcohol in

beverages that are naturally fermented?

NAD How do you think alcoholic beverages of
Ethanol+CO2

alcohol content greater than this concentration
are obtained?
What then is the process by which

respiration organisms can carry out complete oxidation
of glucose and extract the energy stored to