118

 

BIOLOGY

On land, the buccal cavity, skin and lungs act as the respiratory organs.
The respiration by lungs is called pulmonary respiration. The lungs are
a pair of elongated, pink coloured sac-like structures present in the upper
part of the trunk region (thorax). Air enters through the nostrils into the
buccal cavity and then to lungs. During aestivation and hibernation
gaseous exchange takes place through skin.

The vascular system of frog is well-developed closed type. Frogs have
a lymphatic system also. The blood vascular system involves heart, blood
vessels and blood. The lymphatic system consists of lymph, lymph
channels and lymph nodes. Heart is a muscular structure situated in the
upper part of the body cavity. It has three chambers, two atria and one
ventricle and is covered by a membrane called pericardium. A triangular
structure called sinus venosus joins the right atrium. It receives blood
through the major veins called vena cava. The ventricle opens into a sac-
like conus arteriosus on the ventral side of the heart. The blood from the
heart is carried to all parts of the body by the arteries (arterial system).
The veins collect blood from different parts of body to the heart and form
the venous system. Special venous connection between liver and intestine
as well as the kidney and lower parts of the body are present in frogs. The
former is called hepatic portal system and the latter is called renal portal
system. The blood is composed of plasma and cells. The blood cells are
RBC (red blood cells) or erythrocytes, WBC (white blood cells) or leucocytes
and platelets. RBC’s are nucleated and contain red coloured pigment
namely haemoglobin. The lymph is different from blood. It lacks few
proteins and RBCs. The blood carries nutrients, gases and water to the
respective sites during the circulation. The circulation of blood is achieved
by the pumping action of the muscular heart.

The elimination of nitrogenous wastes is carried out by a well
developed excretory system. The excretory system consists of a pair of
kidneys, ureters, cloaca and urinary bladder. These are compact, dark
red and bean like structures situated a little posteriorly in the body cavity
on both sides of vertebral column. Each kidney is composed of several
structural and functional units called uriniferous tubules or nephrons.
Two ureters emerge from the kidneys in the male frogs. The ureters act as
urinogenital duct which opens into the cloaca. In females the ureters and
oviduct open seperately in the cloaca. The thin-walled urinary bladder is
present ventral to the rectum which also opens in the cloaca. The frog
excretes urea and thus is a ureotelic animal. Excretory wastes are carried
by blood into the kidney where it is separated and excreted.

The system for control and coordination is highly evolved in the frog. It
includes both neural system and endocrine glands. The chemical
coordination of various organs of the body is achieved by hormones which
are secreted by the endocrine glands. The prominent endocrine glands
found in frog are pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, thymus, pineal body,
pancreatic islets, adrenals and gonads. The nervous system is organised