BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION

combined diversity at all the levels of biological organisation.
The most important of them are—

(i) Genetic diversity: A single species might show high diversity at
the genetic level over its distributional range. The genetic variation
shown by the medicinal plant Rauwolﬁa vomitoria growing in
different Himalayan ranges might be in terms of the potency and
concentration of the active chemical (reserpine) that the plant
produces. India has more than 50,000 genetically different strains
of rice, and 1,000 varieties of mango.

(ii) Species diversity: The diversity at the species level, for example,
the Western Ghats have a greater amphibian species diversity than
the Eastern Ghats.

(iii) Ecological diversity: At the ecosystem level, India, for instance,
with its deserts, rain forests, mangroves, coral reefs, wetlands,
estuaries, and alpine meadows has a greater ecosystem diversity
than a Scandinavian country like Norway.

It has taken millions of years of evolution, to accumulate this rich
diversity in nature, but we could lose all that wealth in less than two
centuries if the present rates of species losses continue. Biodiversity and
its conservation are now vital environmental issues of international concern
as more and more people around the world begin to realise the critical
importance of biodiversity for our survival and well- being on this planet.

15.1.1 How Many Species are there on Earth and How
Many in India?

Since there are published records of all the species discovered and named,
we know how many species in all have been recorded so far, but it is not
easy to answer the question of how many species there are on earth.
According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (IUCN) (2004), the total number of plant and animal
species described so far is slightly more than 1.5 million, but we have no
clear idea of how many species are yet to be discovered and described.
Estimates vary widely and many of them are only educated guesses. For
many taxonomic groups, species inventories are more complete in
temperate than in tropical countries. Considering that an overwhelmingly
large proportion of the species waiting to be discovered are in the tropics,
biologists make a statistical comparison of the temperate-tropical species
richness of an exhaustively studied group of insects and extrapolate this
ratio to other groups of animals and plants to come up with a gross
estimate of the total number of species on earth. Some extreme estimates
range from 20 to 50 million, but a more conservative and scientiﬁcally
sound estimate made by Robert May places the global species diversity
at about 7 million.

2019—2020