328 BIOLOGY

of cerebral hemispheres and a group of associated deep structures form a
complex structure called limbic system which is concerned with olfaction,
autonomic responses, regulation of sexual behaviour, expression of emotional
reactions, and motivation. The midbrain receives and integrates visual, tactile
and auditory inputs. The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla.
The cerebellum integrates information received from the semicircular canals of
the ear and the auditory system. The medulla contains centres, which control
respiration, cardiovascular reﬂexes, and gastric secretions. Pons consist of ﬁbre
tracts that interconnect different regions of the brain. The entire process of
involuntary response to a peripheral nervous stimulation is called reﬂex action.

Information regarding changes in the environment is received by the CNS
through the sensory organs which are processed and analysed. Signals are then
sent for necessary adjustments. The wall of the human eye ball is composed of
three layers. The external layer is composed of cornea and sclera. Inside sclera is
the middle layer, which is called the choroid. Retina, the innermosht’ layer, contains
two types of photoreceptor cells, namely rggdggnd cones. ”lghe gﬁylight (photopic)
vision and colour vision are functions oftmes ahd twiligi «(@cgptopic) vision is the
function of the rods. The light entersyrtlfrgisl’ghaeornea, tgagléns and the images of
objects are formed on the retina. {LA \“23 N

The ear can be divided into gn‘e‘ou‘ﬁeggeﬁr, the middle ear and the inner ear. The
middle ear contains three ossicles called malleus, incus and stapes. The ﬂuid
ﬁlled inner ear is called the labyrinth, and the coiled portion of the labyrinth is
called cochlea. The organ of corti is a structure which contains hair cells that act
as auditory receptors and is located on the basilar membrane. The vibrations
produced in the ear drum are transmitted through the ear ossicles and oval window
to the ﬂuid-ﬁlled inner ear. Nerve impulses are generated and transmitted by the
afferent ﬁbres to the auditory cortex of the brain. The inner ear also contains a
complex system located above the cochlea called vestibular apparatus. It is
inﬂuenced by gravity and movements, and helps us in maintaining balance of the

body and posture.