@WNQWPWP

>—I>—I>—I>—I>—I>—I
971%.“pr

16.

17.
18.
19.

21.

20.

 

BIOLOGY

(f) The process of release of ovum from a mature follicle is called

(g) Ovulation is induced by a hormone called

(h) The fusion of male and female gametes is called

(i) Fertilisation takes place in

(j) Zygote divides to form which is implanted in uterus.

(k) The structure which provides vascular connection between foetus
and uterus is called

Draw a labelled diagram of male reproductive system.

Draw a labelled diagram of female reproductive system.

Write two major functions each of testis and ovary.

Describe the structure of a seminiferous tubule.

What is spermatogenesis? Brieﬂy describe the process of spermatogenesis.
Name the hormones involved in regulation of spermatogenesis.
Define spermiogenesis and spermiation.

Draw a labelled diagram of sperm.

What are the major components of seminal plasma?

What are the major functions of male accessory ducts and glands?
What is oogenesis? Give a brief account of oogenesis.

Draw a labelled diagram of a section through ovary.

Draw a labelled diagram of a Graaﬁan follicle?

Name the functions of the following:

(a) Corpus luteum (b) Endometrium

(c) Acrosome (d) Sperm tail

(e) Fimbriae

Identify True/False statements. Correct each false statement to make
it true.

(a) Androgens are produced by Sertoli cells. (True/False)

(b) Spermatozoa get nutrition from Sertoli cells. (True/False)
(c) Leydig cells are found in ovary. (True/False)

(d) Leydig cells synthesise androgens. (True/False)

(e) Oogenesis takes place in corpus luteum. (True/False)

(f) Menstrual cycle ceases during pregnancy. (True/ False)

(g) Presence or absence of hymen is not a reliable indicator of virginity
or sexual experience. (True/False)

What is menstrual cycle? Which hormones regulate menstrual cycle?
What is parturition? Which hormones are involved in induction of parturition?

In our society the women are often blamed for giving birth to daughters.
Can you explain why this is not correct?

How many eggs are released by a human ovary in a month? How many
eggs do you think would have been released if the mother gave birth to
identical twins? Would your answer change if the twins born were
fraternal?

How many eggs do you think were released by the ovary of a female dog
which gave birth to 6 puppies?

2019-2020