Fusion of
gametes

Figure 1.7

      
 

individual

 

 

(b)

(a) Homogametic contact in
alga; (b) Germinating pollen
grains on the stigma of a ﬂower

 

BIOLOGY

In seed plants, pollen grains are the carriers of male
gametes and ovule have the egg. Pollen grains
produced in anthers therefore, have to be transferred
to the stigma before it can lead to fertilisation (Figure
1 .7b). In bisexual, self-fertilising plants, e. g., peas,
transfer of pollen grains to the stigma is relatively easy
as anthers and stigma are located close to each other;
pollen grains soon after they are shed, come in contact
with the stigma. But in cross pollinating plants
(including dioecious plants), a specialised event called
pollination facilitates transfer of pollen grains to the
stigma. Pollen grains germinate on the stigma and the
pollen tubes carrying the male gametes reach the ovule
and discharge male gametes near the egg. In dioecious
animals, since male and female gametes are formed in
different individuals, the organism must evolve a
special mechanism for gamete transfer. Successful
transfer and coming together of gametes is essential
for the most critical event in sexual reproduction, the
fertilisation.

1.2.2 Fertilisation

The most vital event of sexual reproduction is perhaps
the fusion of gametes. This process called syngamy
results in the formation of a diploid zygote. The term
fertilisation is also often used for this process. The
terms syngamy and fertilisation are frequently used
though , interchangeably.

What would happen if syngamy does not occur?

However, it has to be mentioned here that in some
organisms like rotifers, honeybees and even some lizards
and birds (turkey), the female gamete undergoes

development to form new organisms without fertilisation. This
phenomenon is called parthenogenesis.

Where does syngamy occur? In most aquatic organisms, such as a
majority of algae and fishes as well as amphibians, syngamy occurs in
the external medium (water), i.e., outside the body of the organism. This
type of gametic fusion is called external fertilisation. Organisms
exhibiting external fertilisation show great synchrony between the sexes
and release a large number of gametes into the surrounding medium
(water) in order to enhance the chances of syngamy. This happens in the
bony ﬁshes and frogs where a large number of offspring are produced. A
major disadvantage is that the offspring are extremely vulnerable to
predators threatening their survival up to adulthood.

2019-2020