ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS

 

present on the inner side of the endodermis and above the phloem in the
form of semi-lunar patches of sclerenchyma. In between the vascular bundles
there are a few layers of radially placed parenchymatous cells, which constitute
medullary rays. A large number of vascular bundles are arranged in a ring ;
the ‘ring’ arrangement of vascular bundles is a characteristic of dicot stem.
Each vascular bundle is conjoint, open, and with endarch protoxylem. A
large number of rounded, parenchymatous cells with large intercellular
spaces which occupy the central portion of the stem constitute the pith.

6.3.4 Monocotyledonous Stem

The monocot stem has a sclerenchymatous hypodermis, a large number
of scattered vascular bundles, each surrounded by a sclerenchymatous
bundle sheath, and a large, conspicuous parenchymatous ground tissue
(Figure 6.7b). Vascular bundles are conjoint and closed. Peripheral
vascular bundles are generally smaller than the centrally located ones.
The phloem parenchyma is absent, and water-containing cavities are
present within the vascular bundles.

6.3.5 Dorsiventral (Dicotyledonous) Leaf

The vertical section of a dorsiventral leaf through the lamina shows three
main parts, namely, epidermis, mesophyll and vascular system. The
epidermis which covers both the upper surface (adaxial epidermis) and
lower surface (abaxial epidermis) of the leaf has a conspicuous cuticle.
The abaXial epidermis generally bears more stomata than the adaxial
epidermis. The latter may even lack stomata. The tissue between the upper
and the lower epidermis is called the mesophyll. Mesophyll, which
possesses chloroplasts and carry out photosynthesis, is made up of
parenchyma. It has two types of cells — the palisade parenchyma and
the spongy parenchyma. The adaxially placed palisade parenchyma is
made up of elongated cells, which are arranged vertically and parallel to
each other. The oval or round and loosely arranged spongy parenchyma
is situated below the palisade cells and extends to the lower epidermis.
There are numerous large spaces and air cavities between these cells.
Vascular system includes vascular bundles, which can be seen in the
veins and the midrib. The size of the vascular bundles are dependent on
the size of the veins. The veins vary in thickness in the reticulate venation
of the dicot leaves. The vascular bundles are surrounded by a layer of
thick walled bundle sheath cells. Look at Figure 6.8 (a) and ﬁnd the
position of xylem in the vascular bundle.

6.3.6 Isobilateral (Monocotyledonous) Leaf

The anatomy of isobilateral leaf is similar to that of the dorsiventral leaf in
many ways. It shows the following characteristic differences. In an