Figure 8.5

Diagrammatic
representation
of Lymph nodes

BIOLOGY

into antigen- sensitive lymphocytes. After maturation the
lymphocytes migrate to secondary lymphoid organs like spleen,
lymph nodes, tonsils, Peyer’s patches of small intestine and
appendix. The secondary lymphoid organs provide the sites for
interaction of lymphocytes with the antigen, which then proliferate
to become effector cells. The location of various lymphoid organs
in the human body is shown in Figure 8.5.

The bone marrow is the main lymphoid organ where all
blood cells including lymphocytes are produced. The thymus
is a lobed organ located near the heart and beneath the
breastbone. The thymus is quite large at the time of birth but
keeps reducing in size with age and by the time puberty is
attained it reduces to a very small size. Both bone-marrow
and thymus provide micro-environments for the development
and maturation of T-lymphocytes. The spleen is a large bean-
shaped organ. It mainly contains lymphocytes and phagocytes.
It acts as a ﬁlter of the blood by trapping blood-borne micro-
organisms. Spleen also has a large reservoir of erythrocytes.
The lymph nodes are small solid structures located at different
points along the lymphatic system. Lymph nodes serve to trap the
micro-organisms or other antigens, which happen to get into the lymph
and tissue ﬂuid. Antigens trapped in the lymph nodes are responsible for
the activation of lymphocytes present there and cause the immune
response.

There is lymphoid tissue also located within the lining of the major
tracts (respiratory, digestive and urogenital tracts) called mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). It constitutes about 50 per cent of
the lymphoid tissue in human body.

8.3 AIDS

The word AIDS stands for Acquired Immuno Deﬁciency Syndrome.
This means deﬁciency of immune system, acquired during the lifetime of
an individual indicating that it is not a congenital disease. ‘Syndrome’
means a group of symptoms. AIDS was ﬁrst reported in 1981 and in the
last twenty-ﬁve years or so, it has spread all over the world killing more
than 25 million persons.

AIDS is caused by the Human Immuno deﬁciency Virus (HIV), a
member of a group of viruses called retrovirus, which have an envelope
enclosing the RNA genome (Figure 8.6). Transmission of HIV-infection
generally occurs by (a) sexual contact with infected person, (b) by
transfusion of contaminated blood and blood products, (c) by sharing
infected needles as in the case of intravenous drug abusers and (d) from
infected mother to her child through placenta. So, people who are at high
risk of getting this infection includes - individuals who have multiple

2019-2020