ANATOMY or FLOWERING PLANTS 89

arranged cells, which form a continuous layer. Epiderrnis is usually single-
layered. Epidermal cells are parenchymatous with a small amount of
cytoplasm lining the cell wall and a large vacuole. The outside of the
epidermis is often covered with a waxy thick layer called the cuticle which
prevents the loss of water. Cuticle is absent in roots. Stomata are structures
present in the epidermis of leaves. Stomata regulate the process of
transpiration and gaseous exchange. Each stoma is composed of two bean-
shaped cells known as guard cells which enclose stomatal pore. In grasses,
the guard cells are dumb-bell shaped. The outer walls of guard cells (away
from the stomatal pore) are thin and the inner walls (towards the stomatal
pore) are highly thickened. The guard cells possess chloroplasts and
regulate the opening and closing of stomata. Sometimes, a few epidermal
cells, in the vicinity of the guard cells become specialised in their shape and
size and are known as subsidiary cells. The stomatal aperture, guard
cells and the surrounding subsidiary cells are together called stomatal
apparatus (Figure 6.4).

 

 

   
 

Epidermal cells

Subsidiary cells
Chloroplast

Guard cells

Stomatal
pore

 

 

 

Figure 6.4 Diagrammatic representation: (a) stomata with bean-shaped guard cells
(b) stomata with dumb-bell shaped guard cell

The cells of epidermis bear a number of hairs. The root hairs are
unicellular elongations of the epidermal cells and help absorb water and
minerals from the soil. On the stem the epidermal hairs are called
trichomes. The trichomes in the shoot system are usually multicellular.
They may be branched or unbranched and soft or stiff. They may even
be secretory. The trichomes help in preventing water loss due to
transpiration.

6.2.2 The Ground Tissue System

All tissues except epidermis and vascular bundles constitute the ground
tissue. It consists of simple tissues such as parenchyma, collenchyma
and sclerenchyma. Parenchymatous cells are usually present in cortex,
pericycle, pith and medullary rays, in the primary stems and roots. In
leaves, the ground tissue consists of thin-walled chloroplast containing
cells and is called mesophyll.

2019-2020