LOCOMOT ION AND MOVEMENT

 

ulna, carpals (wrist bones — 8 in number),
metacarpals (palm bones — 5 in number) and
phalanges (digits — 14 in number) (Figure
20.9). Femur (thigh bone — the longest bone),
tibia and ﬁbula, tarsals (ankle bones — 7 in
number), metatarsals (5 in number) and
phalanges (digits — 14 in number) are the
bones of the legs (hind limb) (Figure 20.10). A
cup shaped bone called patella cover the knee
ventrally (knee cap).

Pectoral and Pelvic girdle bones help in
the articulation of the upper and the lower limbs
respectively with the axial skeleton. Each
girdle is formed of two halves. Each half of
pectoral girdle consists of a clavicle and a
scapula (Figure 20.9). Scapula is a large
triangular ﬂat bone situated in the dorsal part
of the thorax between the second and the
seventh ribs. The dorsal, ﬂat, triangular body
of scapula has a slightly elevated ridge called
the spine which projects as a ﬂat, expanded
process called the acromion. The clavicle
articulates with this. Below the acromion is a
depression called the glenoid cavity which
articulates with the head of the humerus to
form the shoulder j oint. Each clavicle is a long
slender bone with two curvatures. This bone
is commonly called the collar bone.

Pelvic girdle consists of two coxal bones
(Figure 20.10). Each coxal bone is formed by
the fusion of three bones — ilium, ischium and
pubis. At the point of fusion of the above bones
is a cavity called acetabulum to which the thigh
bone articulates. The two halves of the pelvic
girdle meet ventrally to form the pubic
symphysis containing ﬁbrous cartilage.

20.4 JOINTS

Joints are essential for all types of movements
involving the bony parts of the body.
Locomotory movements are no exception to

 

Figure 20.9 Right pectoral girdle and upper
arm. (frontal view)

Ilium
Coxal bone
Pubis Sacrum
Ischium

Femur

Patella

   
   

 

I
.

.‘I
‘5’.” T arsals

17" Metatarsals
’ ' Phalanges

Figure 20.10 Right pelvic girdle and lower limb
bones (frontal view)