338

 

BIOLOGY

uptake and utilisation. As a result, there is a rapid movement of glucose
from blood to hepatocytes and adipocytes resulting in decreased blood
glucose levels (hypoglycemia). Insulin also stimulates conversion of
glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) in the target cells. The glucose
homeostasis in blood is thus maintained jointly by the two — insulin and
glucagons.

Prolonged hyperglycemia leads to a complex disorder called diabetes
mellitus which is associated with loss of glucose through urine and
formation of harmful compounds known as ketone bodies. Diabetic
patients are successfully treated with insulin therapy.

22.2.9 Testis

A pair of testis is present in the scrotal sac (outside abdomen) of male
individuals (Figure 22.1). Testis performs dual functions as a primary
sex organ as well as an endocrine gland. Testis is composed of
seminiferous tubules and stromal or interstitial tissue. The Leydig
cells or interstitial cells, which are present in the intertubular
spaces produce a group of hormones called androgens mainly
testosterone.

Androgens regulate the development, maturation and functions of
the male accessory sex organs like epididymis, vas deferens, seminal
vesicles, prostate gland, urethra etc. These hormones stimulate muscular
growth, growth of facial and axillary hair, aggressiveness, low pitch of
voice etc. Androgens play a major stimulatory role in the process of
sperrnatogenesis (formation of spermatozoa). Androgens act on the central
neural system and inﬂuence the male sexual behaviour (libido). These
hormones produce anabolic (synthetic) effects on protein and carbohydrate
metabolism.

22.2. 10 Ovary

Females have a pair of ovaries located in the abdomen (Figure 22.1). Ovary
is the primary female sex organ which produces one ovum during each
menstrual cycle. In addition, ovary also produces two groups of steroid
hormones called estrogen and progesterone. Ovary is composed of
ovarian follicles and stromal tissues. The estrogen is synthesised and
secreted mainly by the growing ovarian follicles. After ovulation, the
ruptured follicle is converted to a structure called corpus luteum, which
secretes mainly progesterone.

Estrogens produce wide ranging actions such as stimulation of growth
and activities of female secondary sex organs, development of growing