BIOLOGY

12.2.3 Molecular Diagnosis

You know that for effective treatment of a disease, early diagnosis and
understanding its pathophysiology is very important. Using conventional
methods of diagnosis (serum and urine analysis, etc.) early detection is
not possible. Recombinant DNA technology, Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) and Enzyme Linked Immuno-sorbent Assay (ELISA) are some of
the techniques that serve the purpose of early diagnosis.

Presence of a pathogen (bacteria, Viruses, etc.) is normally suspected
only when the pathogen has produced a disease symptom. By this time
the concentration of pathogen is already very high in the body. However,
very low concentration of a bacteria or Virus (at a time when the symptoms
of the disease are not yet visible) can be detected by ampliﬁcation of their
nucleic acid by PCR. Can you explain how PCR can detect very low
amounts of DNA? PCR is now routinely used to detect HIV in suspected
AIDS patients. It is being used to detect mutations in genes in suspected
cancer patients too. It is a powerful techqnique to identify many other
genetic disorders.

A single stranded DNA or RNA, tagged with a radioactive molecule
(probe) is allowed to hybridise to its complementary DNA in a clone of
cells followed by detection using autoradiography. The clone having the
mutated gene will hence not appear on the photographic ﬁlm, because
the probe will not have complementarity with the mutated gene.

ELISA is based on the principle of antigen-antibody interaction.
Infection by pathogen can be detected by the presence of antigens
(proteins, glycoproteins, etc.) or by detecting the antibodies synthesised
against the pathogen.

12.3 TRANSGENIC ANIMALS

Animals that have had their DNA manipulated to possess and express an
extra (foreign) gene are known as transgenic animals. Transgenic rats,
rabbits, pigs, sheep, cows and ﬁsh have been produced, although over
95 per cent of all existing transgenic animals are mice. Why are these
animals being produced? How can man beneﬁt from such modifications?
Let us try and explore some of the common reasons:

(i) Normal physiology and development: Transgenic animals can
be speciﬁcally designed to allow the study of how genes are
regulated, and how they affect the normal functions of the body
and its development, e. g., study of complex factors involved in growth
such as insulin-like growth factor. By introducing genes from other
species that alter the formation of this factor and studying the
biological effects that result, information is obtained about the
biological role of the factor in the body.

(ii) Study of disease: Many transgenic animals are designed to increase
our understanding of how genes contribute to the development of

2019—2020