ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

levels. Although ozone depletion is occurring widely in the stratosphere,
the depletion is particularly marked over the Antarctic region. This has
resulted in formation of a large area of thinned ozone layer, commonly
called as the ozone hole (Figure 16.8).

UV radiation of wavelengths shorter than UV-B, are almost completely
absorbed by Earth’s atmosphere, given that the ozone layer is intact. But,
UV-B damages DNA and mutation may occur. It causes aging of skin,
damage to skin cells and various types of skin cancers. In human eye,
cornea absorbs UV—B radiation, and a high dose of UV—B causes
inﬂammation of cornea, called snow-blindness, cataract, etc. Such
exposure may permanently damage the cornea.

Recognising the deleterious affects of ozone depletion, an international
treaty, known as the Montreal Protocol, was signed at Montreal (Canada)
in 1987 (effective in 1989) to control the emission of ozone depleting
substances. Subsequently many more efforts have been made and
protocols have laid down deﬁnite roadmaps, separately for developed and
developing countries, for reducing the emission of CFCs and other ozone
depleting chemicals.

16.8 DEGRADATION BY IMPROPER RESOURCE UTILISATION
AND MAINTENANCE

The degradation of natural resources can occur, not just by the action of
pollutants but also by improper resource utilisation practices.

Soil erosion and desertiﬁcation: The development of the fertile top-soil
takes centuries. But, it can be removed very easily due to human activities
like over-cultivation, unrestricted grazing, deforestation and poor
irrigation practices, resulting in arid patches of land. When large barren
patches extend and meet over time, a desert is created. Internationally, it
has been recognised that desertiﬁcation is a major problem nowadays,
particularly due to increased urbanisation.

Waterlogging and soil salinity: Irrigation without proper drainage of
water leads to waterlogging in the soil. Besides affecting the crops,
waterlogging draws salt to the surface of the soil. The salt then is deposited
as a thin crust on the land surface or starts collecting at the roots of the
plants. This increased salt content is inimical to the growth of crops and
is extremely damaging to agriculture. Waterlogging and soil salinity are
some of the problems that have come in the wake of the Green Revolution.

16.9 DEFORESTATION

Deforestation is the conversion of forested areas to non-forested ones.
According to an estimate, almost 40 per cent forests have been lost in the
tropics, compared to only 1 per cent in the temperate region. The present
scenario of deforestation is particularly grim in India. At the beginning of

2019—2020

283