ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS

 

distribution. The proportion of different age groups of males and
females in a population is often presented graphically as age pyramid;
its shape indicates whether a population is stationary, growing or
declining.

Ecological effects of any factors on a population are generally
reﬂected in its size (population density), which may be expressed in
different ways (numbers, biomass, per cent cover, etc.,) depending
on the species.

Populations grow through births and immigration and decline
through deaths and emigration. When resources are unlimited, the
growth is usually exponential but when resources become
progressively limiting, the growth pattern turns logistic. In either
case, growth is ultimately limited by the carrying capacity of the
environment. The intrinsic rate of natural increase (r) is a measure
of the inherent potential of a population to grow.

In nature populations of different species in a habitat do not live
in isolation but interact in many ways. Depending on the outcome,
these interactions between two species are classified as competition
(both species suffer), predation and parasitism (one beneﬁts and the
other suffers), commensalism (one benefits and the other is
unaffected), amensalism (one is harmed, other unaffected) and
mutualism (both species benefit). Predation is a very important
process through which trophic energy transfer is facilitated and some
predators help in controlling their prey populations. Plants have
evolved diverse morphological and chemical defenses against
herbivory. In competition, it is presumed that the superior competitor
eliminates the inferior one (the Competitive Exclusion Principle), but
many closely related species have evolved various mechanisms which
facilitate their co-existence. Some of the most fascinating cases of

mutualism in nature are seen in plant-pollinator interactions.

 

 

 

 

 

EXERCISES

1. How is diapause different from hibernation?

2. If a marine ﬁsh is placed in a fresh water aquarium, will the fish be
able to survive? Why or why not?

3. Most living organisms cannot survive at temperature above 45°C. How

 

are some microbes able to live in habitats with temperatures exceeding 2 39

I 00°C?
4. List the attributes that populations possess but not individuals. —
5. If a population growing exponentially double in size in 3 years, what is

the intrinsic rate of increase (r) of the population?
6. Name important defence mechanisms in plants against herbivory.

2019—2020