EVOLUTION

plants also, the thorn and tendrils of
Bougainvillea and Cucurbita represent
homology (Figure 7 .3a). Homology is
based on divergent evolution whereas
analogy refers to a situation exactly
opposite. Wings of butterﬂy and of birds
look alike. They are not anatomically
similar structures though they perform
similar functions. Hence, analogous
structures are a result of convergent
evolution - different structures evolving
for the same function and hence having
similarity. Other examples of analogy are
the eye of the octopus and of mammals
or the ﬂippers of Penguins and Dolphins.
One can say that it is the similar habitat
that has resulted in selection of similar
adaptive features in different groups of
organisms but toward the same function:
Sweet potato (root modification) and
potato (stem modification) is another
example for analogy.

In the same line of argument,
similarities in proteins and genes
performing a given function among diverse
organisms give clues to common ancestry.
These biochemical similarities point to the
same shared ancestry as structural
similarities among diverse organisms.

Man has bred selected plants and
animals for agriculture, horticulture, sport
or security. Man has domesticated many
wild animals and crops. This intensive
breeding programme has created breeds
that differ from other breeds (e. g., dogs) but
still are of the same group. It is argued that

 

Bougainvillea Cucurbita

(a)

(b)

 

Figure 7.3 Example of homologous organs in

(a) Plants and (b) Animals

if within hundreds of years, man could create new breeds, could not nature

have done the same over millions of years?

Another interesting observation supporting evolution by natural
selection comes from England. In a collection of moths made in 1850s,
i.e., before industrialisation set in, it was observed that there were more
white-winged moths on trees than dark-winged or melanised moths.
However, in the collection carried out from the same area, but after
industrialisation, i.e., in 1920, there were more dark-winged moths in
the same area, i.e., the proportion was reversed.

2019—2020

131