Expressions and Equations
109
Lesson 6-3: Equality
The concept of equality is an important idea and has very special
properties worth examining in more detail. It is used to relate seemingly
distinct objects together and is called a relation. A relation is something
that compares two objects. For example, if I had 10 $1 bills and you had
a $10 bill, then we would have an equal amount of money, even though
the form of our money is different. If my son broke his piggy bank and
discovered that he had 40 quarters, he would have the same amount of
money as we do. This example helps illustrate three important properties
of equality:
(cid:96) Equality is reflexive. This means that any object is equal to
itself. This idea is almost self-evident. To illustrate the
reflexive property mathematically we write a=a. For example,
5= 5.
(cid:96) Equality is symmetric. This means that if object A is equal to
object B, then object B is equal to object A. This property
emphasizes the fact that the order in which we equate objects
doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter if object A appears on the
left or the right hand side of the =. To state this idea
mathematically we write: If a = b, then b = a. For example, if
3⋅ 4 = 12, then 12 = 3 ⋅ 4.
(cid:96) Equality is transitive. This means that if object A is equal to
object B, and object B is equal to object C, then object A is
equal to object C. Object B is just an intermediate object that
can be eliminated in the comparison; we can cut to the chase
and set object A equal to object C. This can be expressed
mathematically as: If a=b and b=c, then a= c. For example,
if 10 ⋅ 5 = 50 and 50 = 25 ⋅ 2, then 10 ⋅ 5 = 25 ⋅ 2.
Because these three properties are so important in mathematics, we
say that any relation that has all three of these properties is an equiva-
lence relation. It is important to note that every equivalence relation has
all three of these properties. There are other relations besides equality
that we will use later on that are not equivalence relations. Those rela-
tions will be missing at least one of the three required properties.