Inequalities and Graphs
145
that we are not allowed to do with equalities that we are allowed to do
with inequalities. The differences in how we treat equalities and inequali-
ties stems from the fact that equality is an equivalence relation, whereas
inequalities are not.
Lesson 8-2: Properties of Inequalities
There are two ways that we can transform equations: We can add (or
subtract) the same number to both sides of the equality, and we can
multiply (or divide) both sides of the equation by the same number. These
transformations are allowed because of the addition property of equality
and the multiplication property of equality. Inequalities actually have
two addition properties and a restricted multiplication property.
The first addition property of inequality states that if a > b, then
a + c > b +  c. To understand this property, let’s go back to our example
with money. Suppose I have $25 and you have $5. If someone gives us
each $5, then I will still have more money than you. I will have $30 and
you will have $10. We will both be richer, but I’ll still be richer than you.
The second addition property of inequality states that if a > b and
c > d, then a+ c>b+  d. Again, this is not surprising. Suppose I have $25
and you have $5. If some kind person gives me $10 and you $5, then I will
definitely still have more money than you.
The only thing you are not allowed to do is try to correct the inequal-
ity by trying to balance things out. Either you give the same amount to
both sides of the inequality (the first addition property) or you increase
the imbalance by giving more to “haves” then you do to the “have nots”
(the second addition property). You are not allowed to try to make up
for any injustice by giving more to the “have nots.” It may not seem fair,
but that’s the way it is. That’s why they are called inequalities.
The restricted multiplication property of inequalities is also fairly
clear. It states that if a>b and c> 0, then a⋅ c>b⋅ c. The restriction that
the number that you multiply by must be positive is very important, and
it is worth looking at in more detail.
Consider the inequality 0 < 1. Suppose that we wanted to multiply
both sides of this inequality by a negative number; let’s multiply both
sides of the inequality 0 < 1 by −1. On the left hand side of the inequality,
you would have 0 ⋅ (−1), which is 0. On the right hand side of the inequal-
ity, you would have 1 ⋅ (−1), which is −1. Now, how does 0 compare to −1?