Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
218
given and what you need to find. You are creating the
equations, so you can choose the variables. Don’t limit yourself
to the variables x and y; sometimes it’s helpful to use the first
letter of what the variable represents. If you get too deep into
a problem it is easy to forget what your variables mean. It
may be worth making a note of it somewhere.
(cid:96) Read the word problem and interpret the description of the
problem in terms of your variables. Be sure to pay attention
to the units involved. There are many ways to represent
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Words such
as sum, more, total, and, plus, or increase indicate that terms
should be added. Words such as difference, less than, fewer,
between, or decreased indicate that terms should be subtracted.
Multiplication is often referred to using words including
product, times, twice, percent, or of. Division will be involved
when you see such words as ratio, divided by, half, third, or
quotient. The word is and the phrase the same as represent
equality.
(cid:96) Solve the equation or evaluate the expression for a particular
value of one of your variables. Use the problem-solving strate-
gies discussed in the earlier chapters to help you solve equa-
tions. Be sure to check your answers to catch any mistakes.
(cid:96) Re-read the question and be sure that the answer you found
actually addresses the question asked. You should think about
your answer to make sure that it makes sense. Giving an absurd
answer to a question is a dead give-away that you didn’t check
your work.
If you use this approach to solve word problems, you should have as
much success solving word problems as I have.
Lesson 12-2: Finding Integers
In this type of problem, you are given clues about an integer and you
are asked to find the integer. Pay special attention to the various ways to
represent addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Always re-
member the order of operations.
www.ebook3000.com