Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
164
ordered pair (a, b). We have already talked about how the number line
can be used to graph a number. In order to graph an ordered pair (a, b)
we will need to be able to graph two numbers simultaneously.
To graph an ordered pair, you will need to use one number line for
the input and another number line for the output. If you arrange these
two number lines so that they are perpendicular to each other, as is shown
in Figure 9.1, you will have created what is known as the Cartesian coor-
dinate system. The Cartesian coordinate system is named for Rene
Descartes, who is credited with inventing it. This coordinate system brings
geometry and algebra together, enabling us to use algebra to solve prob-
lems in geometry, and to use geometry
y-axis to gain insight into algebraic results.
We use this system, which is sometimes
called the coordinate plane, to locate
points and draw figures.
2
The horizontal number line is
called the x-axis, and it is used to
record the values of the input, or in-
x-axis dependent variable, or the first num-
ber in the ordered pair (a, b). The
vertical number line is called the y-axis,
–2 and it is used to record the function
values, or the output, or the values of
the dependent variable, or the second
number in the ordered pair (a,b). We
Figure 9.1 will draw the two number lines so that
they intersect at 0; the point where the
two lines intersect is called the origin. The ordered pair corresponding to
the origin is (0, 0).
Two numbers are used to describe the location of a point in the plane,
and they are recorded as an ordered pair (x, y), where the first number
represents the horizontal distance from the y-axis to the point and the
second number represents the vertical distance from the x-axis to the
point. The first coordinate is called the x-coordinate, and the second
coordinate is called the y-coordinate.
Points that are on the x-axis have a y-coordinate equal to 0, and points
that are on the y-axis have their x-coordinate equal to 0. Those points
that lie to the right of the y-axis have a positive x-coordinate and points
to the left of the y-axis have a negative x-coordinate. Similarly, points
www.ebook3000.com