Numbers
23
Zero is the great leveler of multiplication. You can take a number as big
as three trillion, but simply multiplying it by 0 leaves you with 0. I can’t
say it enough: Zero times any number is zero. So, adding 0 to a number
doesn’t change the number, but multiplying a number by 0 turns that
number into 0.
I have given you plenty of reasons why zero is a pretty special num-
ber, but there’s even more to admire about it. If you multiply any two
numbers together and get 0, then you know that one of the numbers
involved in the multiplication must have been 0. In other words, the only
way that the product of two numbers is 0 is if one of the two numbers in
the product is 0. Wow—0 is a many-splendored thing.
Zero has gotten all of the attention in this lesson, but there is another
number mentioned in the title: 1. The number 1 can also do some amazing
things. Multiplying a number by 1 doesn’t change the number: 6 × 1 = 6
and 30 × 1 = 30. The number 1 is the only number with this particular
property. We call 1 the multiplicative identity because nothing changes
when you multiply a number by 1. Zero is to addition as 1 is to multiplica-
tion. It will be important to remember these properties because they
come in handy in algebra.
Lesson 1-6: Division
Division is the reverse, or undoing, of multiplication. Division is re-
lated to multiplication in the same way that subtraction is related to addi-
tion. Because 4 × 5 = 20 we say that  and  . Being familiar
with the multiplication table will be very helpful when solving division
problems.
The symbols used for division are 
The expressions   all mean the same thing.
The number 20 in all of the examples is the number that gets divided; it is
called the dividend. The number 5 in all of the examples is the number
that divides into the dividend; it is called the divisor. The answer ob-
tained after doing the division is called the quotient. Just as with subtrac-
tion, order matters; division is not commutative.
To work out a division problem involving two-digit numbers, it is
best to use long division. I will review long division in the first example.