Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
160
the input, and the other quantity is called the output. The input is also
called the domain, and the output is often referred to as the range or the
co-domain. Because a relation involves a relationship between two differ-
ent quantities, we will need two variables to keep track of, or represent,
these two quantities. The variable used to represent the input is called
the independent variable, and the variable used to represent the output is
called the dependent variable.
A relation is often written as a collection of ordered pairs. Ordered
pairs are an efficient way to keep track of the relationship between the
input values and the output values. An ordered pair consists of two ele-
ments, the first element coming from the domain and the second one
coming from the range. The two elements are written side by side, sepa-
rated by a comma and surrounded by parentheses. I have just used a lot
of words to describe an object that looks this way: (a, b), where a is an
object in the domain and b is an object in the range that is related to a. If
the independent variable is called x, we call a the x-coordinate of the
ordered pair, and if the dependent variable is called y, we call b the y-
coordinate of the ordered pair.
Relations are fairly relaxed in the sense that there are no restrictions
or regulations regarding the number of output values that can be associ-
ated with a particular input value. The input values are values that the
independent variable takes on, and the output values are the correspond-
ing values for the dependent variable.
Relations can be described in a variety of ways. You can describe a
relation using words, a formula, a table of input and output values, a list
of ordered pairs, or a graph.
It may be helpful to give you a couple of ex-
Input Output
amples of relations. Here’s a list of ordered pairs:
(1, 3), (2, 6), (2, 4), (3, 9). This same relation could 1 3
be represented using the table on this page.
2 6
The problem with tables and lists of ordered
pairs is that you are limited to the data provided. 2 4
You would not be able to determine the output
3 9
value that corresponds to an input value of 4 for
this relation. Not only that, but the output isn’t
necessarily a unique value determined by the input. As you can see in the
previous table, an input of 2 results in two different outputs: 6 and 4. This
is one of the problems associated with relations.
www.ebook3000.com