Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
84
less than 1. We use the base ten system to represent the integral part, and
we use the decimal system to represent the fractional part. A decimal
number is a number with both an integral part (remember that 0 is an
integer) and a fractional part. The decimal system is similar to the base
ten system in that we use the same ten symbols, powers of 10 play an
important role in interpreting the numbers, and the order in which you
write the numbers matters. You have been working with decimals for at
least as long as you have been working with money. A quarter can be
represented as 25 cents or $0.25, but, either way, you know that a quarter
is less than a dollar.
The decimal representation of a number involves a decimal point; we
use the symbol “.” (a period) to represent the decimal point. Numbers to
theleft of the decimal point make up the integral part of the number, and
numbers to the right make up the fractional part, or decimal fraction. A
decimal number has two parts: the integral part and the decimal fraction.
The first place to the right of the decimal is called the tenths’ place.
Whatever number is located in the tenths’ place is interpreted as being
the numerator of a fraction that has 10 as the denominator. The next
place to the right is the hundredths’ place. Whatever number is located in
the hundredths place is interpreted as being the numerator of a fraction
that has 100 as its denominator. In our example of a quarter, or $0.25, the
2 is in the tenths’ place and the 5 is in the hundredths’ place. The 2 in the
tenths’ place is really  , and the 5 in the hundredths’ place is really  .
Continue interpreting the places to the right of the decimal point: There
is the thousandths’ place, the ten-thousandths’ place, and so on. All of
these individual fractions will add up to equal the decimal fraction.
To illustrate the components of a decimal number, consider the num-
ber 12.325. The decimal number 12.325 represents 1 ten, 2 ones, 3 tenths,
2 hundredths, and 5 thousandths. The sum of these components is 12.325:
The decimal number 0.3 is equivalent to the fraction  . If the magni-
tude of a decimal number is less than 1 then a 0 is put to the left of the
decimal point to make it clear that the integral part of the number is 0.
Every integer can be represented as a decimal number by putting a
decimal point immediately after the number in the ones’ place. The num-
ber 7 can be written as 7.0 or 7.00 or 7.000. Just as a positive sign is
implied most of the time and is not written, with integers the decimal
www.ebook3000.com