Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
144
A solution to an inequality is a number that produces a true state-
ment when it is substituted for the variable in the inequality. Inequalities
are more flexible than equalities and are therefore easier to satisfy than
are equalities. There is only one number that is equal to 3, even though
there are many ways to write the number 3. We can write 3 as 4 − 1, or
2 + 1, or  , but no matter how you slice it, they all represent the same
number. With inequalities, there are a whole lot of numbers that are
greater than 3. I can think of several numbers right away, such as 4, 5, 6,
7, and 8, and I am just getting started. These numbers are all different
from each other; they are not different representations of the same num-
ber. Because of the flexibility in satisfying an inequality, inequalities usu-
ally have many solutions.
We can examine which of these inequalities, if any, are equivalence
relations. I will examine < and ≤ in more detail.
To determine whether < (less than) is an equivalence relation, we
need to check to see if it has all three required properties:
1. Reflexive property: Is a < a? Is a number less than itself?
No.
2. Symmetric property: If a < b is b < a? No.
3. Transitive property: If a < b and b < c, is a < c? Yes.
So, < is not an equivalence relation because it only has the transitive
property; it does not have the reflexive and symmetric properties.
To determine whether ≤ (less than or equal to) is an equivalence
relation, we need to check to see if it has all three required properties:
1. Reflexive property: Is a ≤ a? Yes.
2. Symmetric property: If a ≤ b is b ≤ a? Not always, so no.
3. Transitive property: If a ≤ b and b ≤ c, is a ≤ c? Yes.
So, ≤ is not an equivalence relation because it only has the reflexive
and transitive properties; it does not have the symmetric property.
You may be wondering why I spent so much time talking about equiva-
lence relations. In order to solve inequalities we will need to establish some
rules about how we are allowed to transform them. Inequalities are more
flexible than equalities, and as a result there are some transformations
www.ebook3000.com