Expressions and Equations
111
Notice again that with this property I never specified the signs of a, b, or
c. I also never specified whether c was greater than 1 or less than 1. This
property says that I can multiply (or divide) both sides of an equation by
the same number (and this number can be positive or negative, or it can
be a fraction, a decimal number, or an integer) and not change the valid-
ity of the statement.
These properties are certainly interesting in their own right, but, more
importantly, they will play a crucial role in your success in being able to
solve algebraic equations. We’ll see how they are used in the next section.
Lesson 6-5: Solving Linear Equations in 1 Step
An equation involves setting two algebraic expressions equal to each
other and solving for the variable in the expressions. A linear expres-
sion contains only constants and one variable raised to the first power.
A linear expression can look something such as 3x + 2, 3(x − 2) + 1, or
(2x + 3) + (5x − 2). Common to all of these expressions is the fact that
there is only one variable, which is raised to the first power. The third
expression has two terms that involve the variable, but the only variable
in the expression is x.
A linear equation is an equation in which two linear expressions are
set equal to each other. We can use the algebraic properties of equality
to help us solve linear equations.
There are key transformations that you will use repeatedly when solving
equations.When you use these transformations you will produce an equa-
tion that has the same solutions as the original equation, but the solutions
will be easier to see. In other words, you will be transforming the original
equation into a different, equivalent equation that, ideally, will be easier to
solve. The goal is to write an equation of the form x = a number.
The first four transformations that we will practice are described in
the table shown on page 112.
Anything that is done to one side of the equation must also be done
on the other side of the equation. This ensures that balance is main-
tained. Remember that the goal is to determine the value of the variable.
In order to solve for the variable, you must get the variable by itself.
These transformations help you isolate the variable.