Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
110
Lesson 6-4: Algebraic Properties of Equality
Equations represent balance, and any change that you make to an
equation must maintain that balance. Maintaining that balance means
that there are only certain things that you are allowed to do to an equa-
tion. The key point is that whatever you do to one side of the equation
you must also do to the other side of the equation. You are not allowed to
tip the scales and favor one side over another side.
The first algebraic property of equality is known as the addition
property of equality. It states that you are allowed to add the same
amount to both sides of an equation. Mathematically, we write this prop-
erty as follows:
If a, b, and c are numbers with a = b, then a + c = b + c
We are not allowed to favor one side of the equality over the other
side; the quantity c was added to both sides, so the balance is main-
tained. Looking back on the example with money, if you have a $10
bill and I have 10 $1 bills, then we each have the same amount of
money. If a kind stranger gives us each a $20 bill, then we are both
still equally rich; we both have a total of $30. Notice that in the addi-
tion property of equality, the signs of a, b, and c were not specified.
That’s because it doesn’t matter. If I have 10 $1 bills and my son has
40 quarters, and we both decide to spend $2 on an ice-cream cone,
then we will both end up with $8. The addition property of equality is
important because it allows us to add (or subtract) the same number
from both sides of an equation without changing the validity of that
statement.
The second algebraic property of equality is known as the multiplica-
tion property of equality. It states that you are allowed to multiply both
sides of an equality by the same amount. Mathematically, we write this
property as follows:
If a, b, and c are numbers with a = b, then (a)(c) = (b)(c)
Again, one side is not favored over the other side; both sides are
treated equally because both sides are being multiplied by c. Let’s go
back to our example with money. If you have a $10 bill and I have 10 $1
bills, and we both double our money in a bet, then we both now have $20.
www.ebook3000.com