Numbers
25
A smaller number is a factor of a larger number if, when you divide
the smaller number into the larger number, you end up with a remainder
of 0. It is called a factor because you can multiply it by the quotient to get
the larger number. Remember that multiplication and division go hand in
hand. For example, 4 is a factor of 20 because 20 ÷ 4 equals 5 remainder 0.
Looking at it another way, 4 × 5 = 20. We say that 20 is evenly divisibly
by 4. Every number is evenly divisibly by its factors. “Divides evenly”
means the same thing as “has remainder 0.” Every counting number is
evenly divisible by 1 and every counting number is evenly divisible by itself.
Lesson 1-7: Prime Numbers and Factoring
A counting number is prime if the only numbers that divide into it
evenly are 1 and itself. In other words, a prime number has no other
factors besides 1 and itself. For example, 3 is prime because the only
numbers that divide it evenly are 1 and 3.
Remember that every counting number, other than 1, has at least two
factors: 1 and itself. Because the number 1 divides evenly into every other
counting number, we call 1 a trivial factor.
The number 1 is in a class by itself. There is only one counting num-
ber that evenly divides 1: itself. It is not considered to be prime.
If a counting number other than 1 is not prime, it is composite. A
composite number is a number that can be evenly divided by a number
other than 1 or itself. For example, 9 is composite because, in addition to
1 and 9, it is evenly divisible by 3.
We can list the first few prime numbers: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23….
The list of prime numbers never ends. There is no largest prime number.
Over the years, many mathematicians have been, and continue to be,
fascinated with prime numbers, and new discoveries about prime num-
bers are still being made. The largest prime number known requires more
than 4 million digits to write out completely, and mathematicians are
currently looking for an even larger prime number.
Prime numbers are useful for factoring numbers. Every composite
number can be written as a product of prime numbers. For example,
18 = 2 × 3 × 3, and 2 and 3 are prime numbers. In order to factor a
composite number, you need to go down the list of prime numbers, divide
each prime number into the composite number, and check to see if the
remainder is zero. If the remainder is 0, the prime number you used is a
factor of the composite number.