Homework Helpers: Basic Math and Pre-Algebra
162
Keep in mind that it doesn’t matter what we name an expression, just as
it doesn’t matter what we name a variable. We will interchange y and ƒ(x)
frequently, sometimes in the middle of working out one problem! It’s
important that you remember that y and ƒ(x) are common names to de-
note an expression.
A function is a specific type of relation, and, because of that, we can
represent a function in the same way that we can represent a relation:
words, a formula, a table of input and output values, a list of ordered
pairs, or a graph are all examples of ways used to describe a function.
Lesson 9-2: Linear Functions and Equations
A linear function is one of the nicest functions to work with. A linear
function is created when we name a linear expression. Remember that a
linear expression contains only constants and one variable raised to the
first power. The function ƒ(x) = 3x + 2 is an example of a linear function.
If the function is called y instead of ƒ(x) you will see it written as y= 3x+ 2.
Don’t let the names bother you; it doesn’t matter how we name the func-
tion. What matters is the formula that describes it. Two functions that
have different names, but are described using the same formula, repre-
sent the same function.
Linear functions are usually written as ƒ(x) = mx + b, where m and b
are constants and x is the independent variable. The constants m and b
are very important and have special names. The constant m is called the
slope, and the constant b is called the y-intercept. Functions of this form
are called linear because their graphs are lines. Every linear function
involves two constants, the slope and the y-intercept, and one indepen-
dent variable with an exponent equal to 1.
We can evaluate functions for particular values of the independent
variable.
Example 1
Evaluate the function y= 3x+ 2 when x= 2 and write your answer
as an ordered pair.
Solution: When x= 2, y= 3 ⋅ 2 + 2 = 6 + 2 = 8. This corresponds to
the ordered pair (2, 8).
www.ebook3000.com