Linear Functions and Graphs
161
Relations can also be specified by writing a formula and using vari-
ables to represent the input and the output. A formula gives a set of
specific instructions about what to do with the input value. A formula is
an equation where one side of the equal sign is the dependent variable
and the other side of the equal sign consists of an algebraic expression
that only involves the independent variable. For example, if x represents
the input of our relation, or independent variable, and y represents the
output, or the dependent variable, of our relation, the formula y = 2x + 1
specifies a relation between x and y. You could use this formula to calcu-
late the output for various values of the input. Having a formula enables
you to completely describe a relation without having to list every single
ordered pair in the relation.
Relations that are described using words are very important in apply-
ing mathematics to our everyday lives. For example, if your cellular phone
plan costs $35 per month for up to 300 minutes and 39 cents for every
minute over 300, you can use this relationship to calculate your monthly
phone bill.
Relations can be described graphically. The graph of a relation helps
you visualize that relation so that you can understand its properties more
thoroughly. For example, you could look at a graph of the price of a
particular stock over time and decide whether to buy more shares of that
stock.
A function is similar to a relation in that it is a rule that establishes a
relationship between two quantities and has an input and an output. The
input is still called the domain, and the output is still called the range or
the co-domain. The variable used to describe the elements in the domain
is called the independent variable, and the variable used to describe the
elements in the range is called the dependent variable. But there’s more
to a function than there is to a relation.
With a relation, the same input value could result in two different
output values. With a function, this is not allowed. The feature that dis-
tinguishes a function from a relation is that with a function, each input
value is assigned a unique output value. We tend to focus on functions
more than relations because of this extra stipulation.
It is easy to become attached to algebraic expressions and give them
names. I told you in the beginning of this chapter that as soon as you name
an algebraic expression, a function is born. Unfortunately, mathematicians
aren’t very clever with their names; y and ƒ(x) are the most common.