Algebra and Geometry
181
Quadrilaterals can also be classified by the size of their interiorangles.
If all four angles of a quadrilateral are right angles, then the quadrilateral
is called a rectangle. If all four angles of a quadrilateral are right angles
and all four sides have the same length, the quadrilateral is a square.
Figure 10.4 illustrates examples of
these types of quadrilaterals.
A rectangle, a rhombus, and a
square are special types of parallelo-
grams. Because they are parallelo-
grams, they have the property that
their opposite sides have the same Rectangle Square
length. When we describe a rectangle
we only need to specify the length of
Figure 10.4
two adjacent sides. We call these sides
thelength and width of the rectangle.
It doesn’t matter which side we call the length and which side we call the
width. We can always rotate the rectangle to give it a different orienta-
tion. Fortunately, rotating a polygon (or any shape, for that matter)
doesn’t change the length of the sides of the polygon. It only changes its
orientation and how we see it. Of course, using the word length to repre-
sent two ideas can be confusing. We use “length” to refer to one side of a
rectangle, and we use “length” when discussing measurements in general.
You should understand which usage is appropriate from the context of
the problem. Don’t let it bother you when I talk about the length of the
length of a rectangle.
With a square, we only need to specify the length of one of its sides,
as all four sides have the same length. The sides of a square are referred
to as just that: sides of the square.
It is easy to introduce algebra into problems that involve geometry,
as we will see in the following sections. We will start with line segments
and then turn our attention to triangles and other polygons.
Lesson 10-2: Midpoint
We have already combined algebra and geometry to create the Car-
tesian coordinate system. This coordinate system makes graphing points
and lines a breeze. This coordinate system also helps determine the mid-
point of a line segment.