Decimals
97
Example 2
Round 4.8562 to the nearest tenth.
Solution: 4.8562 ≈ 4.9
Example 3
Round 4.265 to the nearest one.
Solution: 4.265 ≈ 4
Rounding enables us to estimate answers without getting bogged down
in the details. It can be used as a quick check to see if our answers make
sense. For example, suppose that I purchase a sweater for $24.99, a pair
of jeans for $42.99, and a shirt for $25.50. To calculate the exact amount
of my purchases I would have to do the addition, down to the penny. This
calculation is not particularly difficult, but if I don’t have a pencil and a
piece of paper handy I may end up holding up the checkout line. I don’t
want to just trust the sales clerk, because he or she could have keyed in
the wrong price. I’m pretty careful with my hard-earned money. If my
goal is to check whether or not the amount I am being charged is correct,
I can accomplish that goal by rounding these prices to the nearest dollar
and quickly adding these numbers together. My sum should be close to
the amount that the sales clerk asks for. If the sales clerk wants $140 for
these purchases, I can quickly verify whether or not I am being charged
the right amount. Depending on how accurate I wanted to be, I could just
round to the nearest dollar and find the sum 25 + 43+ 26. I could make it
easier and round to the nearest ten dollars and find the sum 20 + 40 + 30.
Rounding to the nearest ten dollars, the total should be around $90, so the
charge of $140 is too far off the mark. Rounding to the nearest one dollar,
the total should be around $94, so still, the charge of $140 is too far off the
mark. By doing a little estimating I could save myself around $50.
Rounding can make numbers a little easier to work with. The calcula-
tion is easier, but the trade-off is accuracy. When you balance your check-
book you want to be accurate, but when you are budgeting expenses you
can estimate your monthly phone bill, food bill, and so forth. If you need
to be accurate, don’t round and don’t estimate. If you want to check your
work and see if you are in the ballpark, round and estimate.