Numbers
31
Lesson 1-9: Variables and the Distributive Property
We are starting to talk about the properties of numbers in general.
Some numbers are prime; others are composite. Some numbers are even;
others are odd. Talking about numbers in general can be awkward. We
need a symbol to represent any number. The symbols we use to write
specific numbers, such as 5, cannot be used to represent any number. A
symbol that is used to represent any number is called a variable. We can
use anything other than a number as a variable. We could use letters at
the beginning of the alphabet, such as a,b, or c, to serve as a variable. We
could use letters at the end of the alphabet, such as x, y, or z, to serve as
a variable. We could use a happy face or a star to serve as a variable. The
important thing is that a variable cannot be a number.
Let me show you one way a variable can be used. If I say “Let a
represent any counting number,” then a could be any number from our
list (1, 2, 3, 4…). If I wanted to describe the multiplicative property of 0
(remember that special property: 0 times any number is 0), I use the
symbol a to represent any number and write 0 × a = 0.
We can also use variables to make general statements about num-
bers. We invented multiplication as a shorthand notation for addition.
We noticed that 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 can be shortened to 4 × 3. This shorthand
notation is not specific to the number 3. Any number added to itself 4
times can be written as 4 times that number. This is awkward to express
using words, but it is easy to express using variables: If a is any number,
then a + a + a + a = 4 × a. The multiplication symbol is usually omitted,
and we write 4a instead of 4 × a. Whenever you see a number and a
variable next to each other with nothing in between them, you should
imagine a multiplication symbol between them. The expression 3a means
the same thing as “3 times a,” or 3 × a. The number in front of the vari-
able is called the coefficient of the variable, and it represents how many
times the variable is added to itself.
Now that we know what 3a and 4a mean, let’s examine what 3a + 4a
means. We can write out what 3a and 4a each mean, and go from there:
3a = a + a + a, and 4a = a + a + a + a,
so 3a + 4a means (a + a + a) + (a + a + a + a).
This is just a added to itself 7 times, or 7a. Notice that 3a + 4a = 7a.
Instead of writing out all of the a’s in the sum, it is easier just to add the
coefficients of the variable together and write this new coefficient in front
of the variable. You will see more examples of variables later on in this
lesson, and I wanted you to be prepared.