ATLANTIC OCEAN

Colon

As Panamanian hold a referendum which polls predict will approve the
widening ol thalr Increasmgly overloaded canai. Nicaragua wanls to
build an ellernellve, opening the way for ships more Ihan double [he

size of lhose Panama will be able to accommodate eve-n after expeneinn

Panama: Caner! handles PANAMA CA MAI. EXPANSION

‘L 59; of wand shipping Third shipping lane to be added by
bull‘ding rwo new rock complexes

Weler—eavlng basins: Move 1|\ip'5

hcawem sea and lake level

Chambers: Handle

bigger ships

than existing

A:

Gﬂlu Fl LE .118 J

Maximum level in he
raised D.a5m tuincmw
canal's water reserve {apathy

r. u.
[(-kJH. ao- Nuw fuck

“mm" complexes -.

HONDURAS ,- — New access
Jx, channels

THE TWO Panama Canal Nicaragua
N I C A R A G U A ' CANALS [expanded] Canal

 

Completion 10I4-15

‘3-\\‘ ". _. ; _
\\..\ “\u '- 8 Maximum 120300 230.000
PACIFIC ‘. ship size tonnes tonnes
“5-: ‘9 New York In 9.500lrm 5.7mm

OCEAN
San Francisco [a dimes-ii
f ﬁRM’t‘C hiW’S

ribbean Sea

 

 

--\~. incuthy
Can you think of the impact on traffic in Panama
canal afterthe Nicaraguan canal opens up?

 

 

deep cutting for a length of 12 km. It has a six-
lock system and ships cross the different levels
(26 m up and down) through these locks before
entering the Gulf of Panama.

It shortens the distance between New York
and San Francisco by 13,000 km by sea.
Likewise the distance between Western Europe
and the West-coast of U.S.A; and North-eastern
and Central U.S.A. and East and South-east
Asia is shortened. The economic signiﬁcance of
this Canal is relatively less than that of the
Suez. However, it is vital to the economies of
Latin America.

Inland Waterways

Rivers, canals, lakes and coastal areas have
been important waterways since time
immemorial. Boats and steamers are used as
means of transport for cargo and passengers.
The development of inland waterways is
dependent on the navigability width and depth
of the channel, continuity in the water flow,
and transport technology in use. Rivers are
the only means of transport in dense forests.
Very heavy cargo like coal, cement, timber and
metallic ores can be transported through inland
waterways. In ancient times, riverways were the
main highways of transportation as in the case
of India. But they lost importance because of
competition from railways, lack of water due to
diversion for irrigation, and their poor
maintenance.

 

Fig. 8.12: Inland waterways are a major source
of transport wherever the river is wide, deep
and free of silt

The significance of rivers as inland _
waterways for domestic and international

2019-20

 

Transport and Communication 75 fl ‘ I