ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS

which is not present in the tropical cyclones.
They cover a larger area and can originate over
the land and sea. Whereas the tropical cyclones
originate only over the seas and on reaching
the land they dissipate. The extra tropical
cyclone affects a much larger area as
compared to the tropical cyclone. The wind
velocity in a tropical cyclone is much higher
and it is more destructive. The extra tropical
cyclones move from west to east but tropical
cyclones, move from east to west.

Tropical Cyclones

Tropical cyclones are violent storms that
originate over oceans in tropical areas and
move over to the coastal areas bringing about
large scale destruction caused by violent
winds, very heavy rainfall and storm surges.
This is one of the most devastating natural
calamities. They are known as Cyclones in the
Indian Ocean, Hurricanes in the Atlantic,
Typhoons in the Western Pacific and South
China Sea, and Willy-willies in the Western
Australia.

Tropical cyclones originate and intensify
over warm tropical oceans. The conditions
favourable for the formation and intensiﬁcation
of tropical storms are: (i) Large sea surface with
temperature higher than 27° C; (ii) Presence
of the Coriolis force; (iii) Small variations in the
vertical wind speed; (iv) A pre-existing weak-
low-pressure area or low-level-cyclonic
circulation; (v) Upper divergence above the sea
level system.

The energy that intensiﬁes the storm, comes
from the condensation process in the towering
cumulonimbus clouds, surrounding the
centre of the storm. With continuous supply
of moisture from the sea, the storm is further
strengthened. On reaching the land the
moisture supply is cut off and the storm
dissipates. The place where a tropical cyclone
crosses the coast is called the landfall of the
cyclone. The cyclones, which cross 20° N
latitude generally, recurve and they are more
destructive.

91

A schematic representation of the vertical
structure of a mature tropical cyclonic storm
is shown in Figure 10.10.

A mature tropical cyclone is characterised
by the strong spirally circulating wind around
the centre, called the eye. The diameter of the
circulating system can vary between 1 50 and
250 km.

The eye is a region of calm with subsiding
air. Around the eye is the eye wall, where there
is a strong spiralling ascent of air to greater
height reaching the tropopause. The wind
reaches maximum velocity in this region,
reaching as high as 250 km per hour.
Torrential rain occurs here. From the eye wall
rain bands may radiate and trains of cumulus
and cumulonimbus clouds may drift into the
outer region. The diameter of the storm over
the Bay of Bengal, Arabian sea and Indian
ocean is between 600 - 1200 km. The system
moves slowly about 300 - 500 km per day.
The cyclone creates storm surges and they
inundate the coastal low lands. The storm

peters out on the land.

Undisturbed Winds

\\\ Tropopause l“

—'\
Subsiding

 

4— Direction of the Storm

Figure 10. 10 : Vertical section of the tropical cyclone
(after Rama Sastry)

2019-2020