GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE

attempt synthesis over space. Maps are very
effective tools of geographers in which the
tabular data is converted into visual form to
bring out the spatial pattern.

BRANCHES OF GEOGRAPHY

Please study Figure 1. 1 for recapitulation. It has
very clearly brought out that geography is an
interdisciplinary subject of study. The study of
every subject is done according to some
approach. The major approaches to study
geography have been (i) Systematic and
(ii) Regional. The systematic geography approach
is the same as that of general geography. This
approach was introduced by Alexander Von
Humboldt, a German geographer (1769-1859)
while regional geography approach was
developed by another German geographer and a
contemporary of Humboldt, Karl Ritter
(1779- 1859).

In systematic approach (Figure 1.2), a
phenomenon is studied world over as a whole,
and then the identification of typologies or
spatial patterns is done. For example, if one is
interested in studying natural vegetation, the
study will be done at the world level as a first
step. The typologies such as equatorial rain
forests or softwood conical forests or monsoon
forests, etc. will be identified, discussed and
delimited. In the regional approach, the world
is divided into regions at different hierarchical
levels and then all the geographical phenomena
in a particular region are studied. These
regions may be natural, political or designated
region. The phenomena in a region are studied
in a holistic manner searching for unity in
diversity.

Dualism is one of the main characteristics
of geography which got introduced from the
very beginning. This dualism depended on the
aspect emphasised in the study. Earlier scholars
laid emphasis on physical geography. But
human beings are an integral part of the earth’s
surface. They are part and parcel of nature. They
also have contributed through their cultural
development. Thus developed human
geography with emphasis on human activities.

BRANCHES OF GEOGRAPHY (BASED ON
SYSTEMATIC APPROACH)

1 . Physical Geography

(i) Geomorphology is devoted to the study
of landforms, their evolution and related
processes.

(ii) Climatology encompasses the study of
structure of atmosphere and elements
of weather and climates and climatic
types and regions.

(iii) Hydrology studies the realm of water
over the surface of the earth including
oceans, lakes, rivers and other water
bodies and its effect on different life
forms including human life and their
activities.

(iv) Soil Geography is devoted to study the
processes of soil formation, soil types,
their fertility status, distribution and
use.

2. Human Geography

(i) Social/ Cultural Geography encom-
passes the study of society and its
spatial dynamics as well as the cultural
elements contributed by the society.

(ii) Population and Settlement Geography
(Rural and Urban). It studies population
growth, distribution, density, sex ratio,
migration and occupational structure
etc. Settlement geography studies the
characteristics of rural and urban
settlements.

(iii) Economic Geography studies economic
activities of the people including
agriculture, industry, tourism, trade,
and transport, infrastructure and
services, etc.

(iv) Historical Geography studies the
historical processes through which the
space gets organised. Every region has
undergone some historical experiences
before attaining the present day status.
The geographical features also
experience temporal changes and these
form the concerns of historical

geography.

2019-2020