HOBZCHIO

CHAPTER
1@

arlier Chapter 9 described the uneven
E distribution of temperature over the

surface of the earth. Air expands when
heated and gets compressed when cooled. This
results in variations in the atmospheric
pressure. The result is that it causes the
movement of air from high pressure to low
pressure, setting the air in motion. You already
know that air in horizontal motion is wind.
Atmospheric pressure also determines when
the air will rise or sink. The wind redistributes
the heat and moisture across the planet,
thereby, maintaining a constant temperature
for the planet as a whole. The vertical rising of
moist air cools it down to form the clouds and
bring precipitation. This chapter has been
devoted to explain the causes of pressure
differences, the forces that control the
atmospheric circulation, the turbulent pattern
of wind, the formation of air masses, the
disturbed weather when air masses interact
with each other and the phenomenon of violent
tropical storms.

ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE

Do you realise that our body is subjected to a
lot of air pressure. As one moves up the air
gets varified and one feels breathless.

The weight of a column of air contained in
a unit area from the mean sea level to the top
of the atmosphere is called the atmospheric
pressure. The atmospheric pressure is
expressed in units of milibar. At sea level the
average atmospheric pressure is 1,0 13.2
milibar. Due to gravity the air at the surface is
denser and hence has higher pressure. Air

ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION
AND WEATHER SYSTEMS

pressure is measured with the help of a
mercury barometer or the aneroid barometer.
Consult your book, Practical Work in
Geography — Part I (NCERT, 2006) and learn
about these instruments. The pressure
decreases with height. At any elevation it varies
from place to place and its variation is the
primary cause of air motion, i.e. wind which
moves from high pressure areas to low
pressure areas.

Vertical Variation of Pressure

In the lower atmosphere the pressure
decreases rapidly with height. The decrease
amounts to about 1 mb for each 10 m
increase in elevation. It does not always
decrease at the same rate. Table 10.1 gives
the average pressure and temperature at
selected levels of elevation for a standard
atmosphere.

Table 10. 1 : Standard Pressure and Temperature at

 

 

Selected Levels
Level Pressure in mb Temperature °C
Sea Level 1,013.25 15.2
1 km 898. 76 8. 7
5 km 540.48 —1 7. 3
10km 265.00 —49.7

 

 

 

 

The vertical pressure gradient force is much
larger than that of the horizontal pressure
gradient. But, it is generally balanced by a
nearly equal but opposite gravitational force.
Hence, we do not experience strong upward
winds.

2019-2020