pipelines. These are used for inter-regional and
intra-regional transport, and each one (except
pipelines) carries both passengers and freight.
The significance of a mode depends on the type
of goods and services to be transported, costs
of transport and the mode available.
International movement of goods is handled by
ocean freighters. Road transport is cheaper and
faster over short distances and for door-to-
door services. Railways are most suited for large
volumes of bulky materials over long distances
within a country. High-value, light and
perishable goods are best moved by airways.
In a well-managed transport system, these This means of transport is usually found on steep

 

Fig. 8.1: Ropeway and Cable cars in Austria

various modes complgment each other. mountain slopes and mines which are not suitable for
building roads.
Land Transport transportation and large freighters are the

cheapest. They are important in supplementing
modern channels and carriers which penetrate
the interiors in large countries. In the densely
populated districts of India and China, overland
transport still takes place by human porters or
carts drawn or pushed by humans.

5;];

Most of the movement of goods and services
takes place over land. In early days, humans
themselves were carriers. Have you ever seen a
bride being carried on a palanquin (palki/doli)
by four persons (Kahars in north India). Later
animals were used as beasts of burden. Have
you seen mules, horses and camels, carrying
loads of cargo in rural areas? With the invention Pack Animals
of the wheel, the use of carts and wagons
became important. The revolution in transport
came about only after the invention of the steam
engine in the eighteenth century. Perhaps the
first public railway line was opened in 1825 snow-covered ground. Mulesare preferred
between Stockton and Darlington in northern in the mountainous regions; while camels
England and then onwards, railways became are used for caravan movement in deserts.
the most P01311131” and fastest form 0f transport In India, bullocks are used for pulling carts.
in the nineteenth century. It opened up
continental interiors for commercial grain
farming, mining and manufacturing in USA.
The invention of the internal combustion engine
revolutionised road transport in terms of road ‘
quality and vehicles (motor cars and trucks) l
plying over them. Among the newer
developments in land transportation are
pipelines, ropeways and cableways. Liquids like
mineral oil, water, sludge and sewers are
transported by pipelines. The great freight
carriers are the railways, ocean vessels, barges,
boats and motor trucks and pipelines.

In general, the old and elementary forms

Horses are used as a draught animal even
in the Western countries. Dogs and
reindeerare used in North America, North
Europe and Siberia to draw sledges over

 

 

. . Fig. 8.2: A horse cart in a village Teﬂci,
like the human porter, pack animal, cart or in Ethiopia

wagon are the most expensive means of

 

I I 66 Fundamentals ofHuman Geography

2019-20