transport and trade has been recognised
throughout the developed world. Despite
inherent limitations, many rivers have been
modified to enhance their navigability by
dredging, stabilising river banks, and building
dams and barrages for regulating the ﬂow of
water. The following river waterways are some
of the world’s important highways of commerce.

The Rhine Waterways

The Rhine ﬂows through Germany and the
Netherlands. It is navigable for 700 km from
Rotterdam, at its mouth in the Netherlands to
Basel in Switzerland. Ocean-going vessels can
reach up to Cologne. The Ruhr river joins the
Rhine from the east. It ﬂows through a rich
coalfield and the whole basin has become a
prosperous manufacturing area. Dusseldorf is
the Rhine port for this region. Huge tonnage
moves along the stretch south of the Ruhr. This
waterway is the world’s most heavily used. Each
year more than 20,000 ocean-going ships and
2,00,000 inland vessels exchange their cargoes.
It connects the industrial areas of Switzerland,
Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands
with the North Atlantic Sea Route.

    

Fig. 8.13: The Rhine Waterway
The Danube Waterway

This important inland waterway serves Eastern

Europe. The Danube river rises in the Black

Forest and ﬂows eastwards through many

countries. It is navigable up to Taurna Severin.

The chief export items are wheat, maize, timber,
and machinery.

. I 76 Fundamentals ofﬂuman Geography ‘

2019-20

 

| ————.r’:_

I
Luscembourg _/f/

." ' f

a , - .
min 1m?“

 

Fig. 8.14 : Rhine Waterway

The Volga Waterway

Russia has a large number of developed
waterways, of which the Volga is one of the most
important. It provides a navigable waterway of
1 1,200 km and drains into the Caspian Sea.
The Volga-Moscow Canal connects it with the
Moscow region and the Volga-Don Canal with
the Black Sea.

The Great Lakes — St. Lawrence Seaway

The Great Lakes of North America Superior,
Huron Erie and Ontario are connected by Soo
Canal and Welland Canal to form an inland
waterway. The estuary of St. Lawrence River,
along with the Great Lakes, forms a unique
commercial waterway in the northern part of
North America. The ports on this route like
Duluth and Buffalo are equipped with all
facilities of ocean ports. As such large ocean-
going vessels are able to navigate up the river
deep inside the continent to Montreal. But here
goods have to be trans-shipped to smaller
vessels due to the presence of rapids. Canals
have been constructed up to 3.5 m deep to
avoid these.