124

A habitat in the ecological sense is the totality
of the physical and chemical factors that
constitute the general environment. A system
consisting of biotic and abiotic components is
known as ecosystem. All these components in
ecosystem are inter related and interact with
each other. Different types of ecosystems exist
with varying ranges of environmental
conditions where various plants and animal
species have got adapted through evolution.
This phenomenon is known as ecological
adaptation.

Types of Ecosystems

Ecosystems are of two major types: terrestrial
and aquatic. Terrestrial ecosystem can be
further be classiﬁed into ‘biomes’. A biome is a
plant and animal community that covers a
large geographical area. The boundaries of
different biomes on land are determined mainly
by climate. Therefore, a biome can be defined
as the total assemblage of plant and animal
species interacting within specific conditions.
These include rainfall, temperature, humidity
and soil conditions. Some of the major biomes
of the world are: forest, grassland, desert and
tundra biomes. Aquatic ecosystems can be
classed as marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Marine ecosystem includes the oceans,
estuaries and coral reefs. Freshwater

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

ecosystem includes lakes, ponds, streams,
marshes and bogs.

Structure and Functions of Ecosystems

The structure of an ecosystem involves a
description of the available plant and animal
species. From a structural point of view, all
ecosystems consist of abiotic and biotic factors.
Abiotic factors include rainfall, temperature,
sunlight, atmospheric humidity, soil
conditions, inorganic substances (carbon
dioxide, water, nitrogen, calcium, phosphorus,
potassium, etc.). Biotic factors include the
producers, the consumers (primary,
secondary, tertiary) and the decomposers. The
producers include all the green plants, which
manufacture their own food through
photosynthesis. The primary consumers
include herbivorous animals like deer, goats,
mice and all plant-eating animals. The
carnivores include all the ﬂesh-eating animals
like snakes, tigers and lions. Certain carnivores
that feed also on carnivores are known as top
carnivores like hawks and mongooses.
Decomposers are those that feed on dead
organisms (for example, scavengers like
vultures and crows), and further breaking
down of the dead matter by other decomposing
agents like bacteria and various micro-
organisms.

Sun
a i6
o

C:
m an

Producer l Primary Secondary Tertiary
Green Plants ' consumers l—V Consumers |—> Consumers
l Herbivores Carnivores _ T0p Carnivores

  

1

Soil Nutrients

  

l

Dead Remains

l

Decomposers

Figure 15. l : Structure and functions of ecosystems

2019-2020