towns. Provincial (sub-national) towns can also
have administrative functions, for example,
Victoria (British Columbia), Albany (New York),
Chennai (Tamil Nadu).

Trading and Commercial Towns

Agricultural market towns, such as, Winnipeg
and Kansas city; banking and ﬁnancial centres
like Frankfurt and Amsterdam; large inland
centres like Manchester and St Louis; and
transport nodes such as, Lahore, Baghdad and
Agra have been important trading centres.

Cultural Towns

Places of pilgrimage, such as Jerusalem, Mecca,
Jagannath Puri and Varanasi etc. are
considered cultural towns. These urban
centres are of great religious importance.

Additional functions which the cities
perform are health and recreation (Miami and
Panaji), industrial (Pittsburgh and
J amshedpur), mining and quarrying (Broken
Hill and Dhanbad) and transport (Singapore
and Mughal Sarai).

:JFJ ‘IFJU Krld‘j‘l

Towns and cities of developed and
developing countries reﬂect marked differences
in planning and development. While most cities
in developed countries are planned, most
urban settlements of developing countries have
evolved historically with irregular shapes. For
example, Chandigarh and Canberra are
planned cities, while smaller town in India have
evolved historically from walled cities to large
urban sprawls.

Addis Ababa (The New Flower)

The name of Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa, as
the name indicates (Addis-New, Ababa-Flower)
is a ‘new’ city which was established in 1 878.
The whole city is located on a hill-valley
topography. The road pattern bears the inﬂuence

c 561‘s ABEBA
,- . ...

Urbanisation means the increase in the proportion ,_ .

population of a country who live in urban areas.

The most important cause of urbanisation is rural-urban ’
migration. During the late 19903 some 20 to 30 million ~

people were leaving the countryside every year and
moving into towns and cities.

Developed countries experienced rapid urbanisation
during the nineteenth century.

Developing counties experienced rapid urbanisation
during the second half ofthe twentieth century.

CLASSIFICATION OF TOWNS ON THE
BASIS OF FORMS

An urban settlement may be linear, square, star
or crescent shaped. In fact, the form of the
settlement, architecture and style of buildings
and other structures are an outcome of its
historical and cultural traditions.

 

Fig. 10.8: Morphology of Addis Ababa

 

Fig. 10.9: Skyline of Addis Ababa

Human Settlements

2019-20