MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER

wave moves to a new position (Figure 14.1).
The actual motion of the water beneath the
waves is circular. It indicates that things are
carried up and forward as the wave
approaches, and down and back as it passes.

Characteristics of Waves

Wave crest and trough : The highest and
lowest points of a wave are called the crest
and trough respectively.

Wave height : It is the vertical distance
from the bottom of a trough to the top of
a crest of a wave.

Wave amplitude : It is one-half of the wave
height.

Wave period: It is merely the time interval
between two successive wave crests or
troughs as they pass a fixed point.

Wavelength: It is the horizontal distance
between two successive crests.

Wave speed : It is the rate at which the
wave moves through the water, and is
measured in knots.

Wave jrequency : It is the number of waves
passing a given point during a one-
second time interval.

 

 

 

TIDEs

The periodical rise and fall of the sea level, once
or twice a day, mainly due to the attraction of
the sun and the moon, is called a tide.
Movement of water caused by meteorological
effects (winds and atmospheric pressure
changes) are called surges. Surges are not
regular like tides. The study of tides is very
complex, spatially and temporally, as it has great
variations in frequency, magnitude and height.
The moon’s gravitational pull to a great
extent and to a lesser extent the sun’s
gravitational pull, are the major causes for the
occurrence of tides. Another factor is centrifugal
force, which is the force that acts to counter
balance the gravity. Together, the gravitational
pull and the centrifugal force are responsible
for creating the two major tidal bulges on the
earth. On the side of the earth facing the moon,
a tidal bulge occurs while on the opposite side
though the gravitational attraction of the moon

117

is less as it is farther away, the centrifugal force
causes tidal bulge on the other side (Figure
1 4. 2) .

The ‘tide-generating’ force is the difference
between these two forces; i.e. the gravitational
attraction of the moon and the centrifugal force.
On the surface of the earth, nearest the moon,
pull or the attractive force of the moon is greater
than the centrifugal force, and so there is a net
force causing a bulge towards the moon. On
the opposite side of the earth, the attractive
force is less, as it is farther away from the moon,
the centrifugal force is dominant. Hence, there
is a net force away from the moon. It creates
the second bulge away from the moon. On the
surface of the earth, the horizontal tide
generating forces are more important than the
vertical forces in generating the tidal bulges.

  
  

Tidal bulge
/ S
GRAVITATIoNAL FORCE
Tidal bulge
s
U
N
CENTETEUGAL FORCE

Two resultant tidal bulges

ZCIUi

 

Gravitational and Centrifugal Forces

Figure 14.2 : Relation between gravitational
forces and tides

The tidal bulges on wide continental
shelves, have greater height. When tidal bulges
hit the mid-oceanic islands they become low.
The shape of bays and estuaries along a
coastline can also magnify the intensity of tides.
Funnel-shaped bays greatly change tidal
magnitudes. When the tide is channelled
between islands or into bays and estuaries
they are called tidal currents.

2019-2020