96

of the earth. These are extremely dense and
opaque to the rays of the sun. Sometimes, the
clouds are so low that they seem to touch the
ground. Nimbus clouds are shapeless masses
of thick vapour.

 

 

 

 

Figure 11.2

Identify these cloud types which are
shown in Figure 11.1 and 11.2.

A combination of these four basic types can
give rise to the following types of clouds: high
clouds — cirrus, cirrostratus, cirrocumulus;
middle clouds — altostratus and altocumulus;
low clouds — stratocumulus and nimbostratus
and clouds with extensive vertical
development— cumulus and cumulonimbus.

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Precipitation

The process of continuous condensation in free
air helps the condensed particles to grow in
size. When the resistance of the air fails to hold
them against the force of gravity, they fall on to
the earth’s surface. 80 after the condensation
of water vapour, the release of moisture is
known as precipitation. This may take place
in liquid or solid form. The precipitation in the
form of water is called rainfall, when the
temperature is lower than the DOC, precipitation
takes place in the form of fine ﬂakes of snow
and is called snowfall. Moisture is released in
the form of hexagonal crystals. These crystals
form ﬂakes of snow. Besides rain and snow,
other forms of precipitation are sleet and hail,
though the latter are limited in occurrence and
are sporadic in both time and space.

Sleet is frozen raindrops and refrozen
melted snow-water. When a layer of air with
the temperature above freezing point overlies
a subfreezing layer near the ground,
precipitation takes place in the form of sleet.
Raindrops, which leave the warmer air,
encounter the colder air below. As a result, they
solidify and reach the ground as small pellets
of ice not bigger than the raindrops from which
they are formed.

Sometimes, drops of rain after being
released by the clouds become solidified into
small rounded solid pieces of ice and which
reach the surface of the earth are called
hailstones. These are formed by the rainwater
passing through the colder layers. Hailstones
have several concentric layers of ice one over
the other.

Types of Rainfall

On the basis of origin, rainfall may be classiﬁed
into three main types — the convectional,
orographic or relief and the cyclonic or frontal.

Convectional Rain

The, air on being heated, becomes light and
rises up in convection currents. As it rises, it
expands and loses heat and consequently,
condensation takes place and cumulous
clouds are formed. With thunder and lightening,
heavy rainfall takes place but this does not last

2019-2020