Differentiations between rural and urban
on the basis of functions are more meaningful
even though there is no uniformity in the
hierarchy of the functions provided by rural and
urban settlements. Petrol pumps are considered
as a lower order function in the United States
while it is an urban function in India. Even
within a country, rating of functions may vary
according to the regional economy. Facilities
available in the villages of developed countries
may be considered rare in villages of developing
and less developed countries.

The census of India, 1991 defines urban
settlements as “All places which have
municipality, corporation, cantonment board
or notified town area committee and have a
minimum population of 5000 persons, at
least 75 per cent of male workers are
engaged in non-agricultural pursuits and a
density of population of at least 400 persons
per square kilometers are urban.

TYPES AND PATTERNS OF SETTLEMENTS

Settlements may also be classiﬁed by their
shape, patterns types. The major types
classiﬁed by shape are:

(i) Compact or Nucleated settlements:
These settlements are those in which
large number of houses are built very
close to each other. Such settlements
develop along river valleys and in fertile
plains. Communities are closely knit
and share common occupations.

   

Fig.10.1 : Compact Settlements

Fundamentals of Human Geography

2019-20

(ii)

Dispersed Settlements: In these
settlements, houses are spaced far
apart and often interspersed with ﬁelds.
A cultural feature such as a place of
worship or a market, binds the
settlement together.

 

Fig. 10.2: Dispersed Settlements

Rural Settlements

Rural settlements are most closely and directly
related to land. They are dominated by primary
activities such as agriculture, animal
husbandary, ﬁshing etc. The settlements size
is relatively small. Some factors affecting the
location of rural settlements are :

 

Fig. 10.3 : Siting near water

Water Supply

Usually rural settlements are located near water
bodies such as rivers, lakes, and springs where
water can be easily obtained. Sometimes the
need for water drives people to settle in otherwise
disadvantaged sites such as islands
surrounded by swamps or low lying river
banks. Most water based ‘wet point’ settlements
have many advantages such as water for