over the world soon upgraded their copper cable
systems to include optic fiber cables. These
allow large quantities of data to be transmitted
rapidly, securely, and are virtually error-free.
With the digitisation of information in the 1990s,
telecommunication slowly merged with
computers to form integrated networks termed
as Internet.

Satellite Communication

Today Internet is the largest electronic network
on the planet connecting about 1,000 million
people in more than 100 countries.

Satellites touch human lives in many
ways. Every time you use a cell phone to
call a friend, send an SMS or watch a
popular programme on cable television. You
are using satellite communication.

Communication through satellites
emerged as a new area in communication
technology since the 1970s after U.S.A. and
former U.S.S.R. pioneered space research.
Artificial satellites, now, are successfully
deployed in the earth’s orbit to connect even
the remote corners of the globe with limited on-
site verification. These have rendered the unit
cost and time of communication invariant in
terms of distance. This means it costs the same
to communicate over 500 km as it does over
5,000 km via satellite.

India has also made great strides in
satellite development. Aryabhatt was launched
on 19 April 1979, Bhaskar-I in 1979 and
Rohini in 1980. On 18 June 1981, APPLE
(Arian Passenger Payload Experiment) was
launched through Arian rocket. Bhaskar,

Challenger and INSAT I-B have made long-
distance communication, television and radio
very effective. Today weather forecasting
through television is a boon.

Cyber Space - Internet

Cyberspace is the world of electronic
computerised space. It is encompassed by the
Internet such as the World Wide Web (www).
In simple words, it is the electronic digital
world for communicating or accessing
information over computer networks without
physical movement of the sender and the
receiver... It is also referred to as the Internet.
Cyberspace exists everywhere. It may be in
an office, sailing boat, ﬂying plane and virtually
anywhere.

The speed at which this electronic network
has spread is unprecedented in human
history. There were less than 50 million
Internet users in 1995, about 400 million in
2000 AD. and over two billion in 20 10. In the
last few years there has been a shift among
global users from U.S.A. to the developing
countries. The percentage share of U.S.A. has
dropped from 66 in 1995 to only 25 in 2005.
Now the majority of the world’s users are
in U.S.A., U.K., Germany, Japan, China
and India.

As billions use the Internet each year,
cyberspace will expand the contemporary
economic and social space of humans through
e-mail, e-commerce, e-learning and
e-governance. Internet together with fax,
television and radio will be accessible to more
and more people cutting across place and time.
It is these modern communication systems,
more than transportation, that has made the
concept of global village a reality.

Afriiijl/lif’§§i'i.iz<l,

2019-20