134

 

 

 

 

Figure 16.4 : Humbodtia decurrens Bedd — highly rare
endemic tree of Southern Western Ghats (India)

There is an urgent need to educate people
to adopt environment-friendly practices and
reorient their activities in such a way that our
development is harmonious with other life
forms and is sustainable. There is an
increasing consciousness of the fact that such
conservation with sustainable use is possible
only with the involvement and cooperation of
local communities and individuals. For this,
the development of institutional structures at
local levels is necessary. The critical problem
is not merely the conservation of species nor
the habitat but the continuation of process of
conservation.

The Government of India along with 155
other nations have signed the Convention of
Biodiversity at the Earth Summit held at
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 1 992. The world
conservation strategy has suggested the
following steps for biodiversity conservation:

(i) Efforts should be made to preserve

the species that are endangered.

(ii) Prevention of extinction requires

proper planning and management.
(iii) Varieties of food crops, forage plants,

timber trees, livestock, animals and their

wild relatives should be preserved;

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

(iv) Each country should identify habitats
of wild relatives and ensure their
protection.

(v) Habitats where species feed, breed, rest
and nurse their young should be
safeguarded and protected.

(vi) International trade in wild plants and
animals be regulated.

To protect, preserve and propagate the
variety of species within natural boundaries,
the Government of India passed the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972, under which national
parks and sanctuaries were established and
biosphere reserves declared. Details of these
biosphere reserves are given in the book India:
Physical Environment (NCERT, 2006).

There are some countries which are
situated in the tropical region; they possess
a large number of the world’s species diversity.
They are called mega diversity centres. There
are 12 such countries, namely Mexico,
Columbia, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Madagascar, China, India,
Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia in which
these centres are located. In order to
concentrate resources on those areas that are
most vulnerable, the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN) has identified certain areas
as biodiversity hotspots (Figure 16.5).
Hotspots are defined according to their
vegetation. Plants are important because these
determine the primary productivity of an
ecosystem. Most, but not all, of the hotspots
rely on species-rich ecosystems for food,
firewood, cropland, and income from timber.
In Madagascar, for example, about 85 per
cent of the plants and animals are found
nowhere else in the world, Other hotspots in
wealthy countries are facing different types
of pressures. The islands of Hawaii have
many unique plants and animals that are
threatened by introduced species and
land development.

2019-2020