BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION

ecosystems of which we are also a species.
This fact must be drawn upon every one of
us so that we live and let other species also
live their lives.

It is our ethical responsibility to consider
that each and every species along with us have
an intrinsic right to exist. Hence, it is morally
wrong to voluntarily cause the extinction of any
species. The level of biodiversity is a good
indicator of the state of our relationships with
other living species. In fact, the concept of
biodiversity is an integral part of many human
cultures.

Loss OF BIODIVERSITY

Since the last few decades, growth in human
population has increased the rate of
consumption of natural resources. It has
accelerated the loss of species and habitation
in different parts of the world. Tropical regions
which occupy only about one-fourth of the
total area of the world, contain about three-
fourth of the world human population. Over-
exploitation of resources and deforestation
have become rampant to fulﬁl the needs of large
population. As these tropical rain forests
contain 50 per cent of the species on the earth,
destruction of natural habitats have proved
disastrous for the entire biosphere.

Natural calamities such as earthquakes,
ﬂoods, volcanic eruptions, forest fires,
droughts, etc. cause damage to the ﬂora and
fauna of the earth, bringing change the
biodiversity of respective affected regions.
Pesticides and other pollutants such as
hydrocarbons and toxic heavy metals destroy
the weak and sensitive species. Species which
are not the natural inhabitants of the local
habitat but are introduced into the system, are
called exotic species. There are many
examples when a natural biotic community of
the ecosystem suffered extensive damage
because of the introduction of exotic species.
During the last few decades, some animals like
tigers, elephants, rhinoceros, crocodiles, minks
and birds were hunted mercilessly by poachers
for their horn, tusks, hides, etc. It has resulted
in the rendering of certain types of organisms
as endangered category.

133

The International Union of Conservation
of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) has
classified the threatened species of plants and
animals into three categories for the purpose
of their conservation.

Endangered Species

It includes those species which are in danger
of extinction. The IUCN publishes information
about endangered species world-wide as the
Red List of threatened species.

 

 

 

Figure 16.2 : Red Panda — an endangered species
Vulnerable Species

This includes the species which are likely to
be in danger of extinction in near future if the
factors threatening to their extinction continue.
Survival of these species is not assured as their
population has reduced greatly.

Rare Species

Population of these species is very small in the
world; they are conﬁned to limited areas or
thinly scattered over a wider area.

CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY

Biodiversity is important for human existence.
All forms of life are so closely interlinked that
disturbance in one gives rise to imbalance in
the others. If species of plants and animals
become endangered, they cause degradation
in the environment, which may threaten
human beings own existence.

2019-2020