their importance to quicker and more ﬂexible
transport systems of airways and roadways.

In Russia, railways account for about 90
per cent of the country’s total transport with a
very dense network west of the Urals. Moscow
is the most important rail head with major lines
radiating to different parts of the country’s vast
geographical area. Underground railways and
commuter trains are also important in Moscow.

North America has one of the most
extensive rail networks accounting for nearly
40 per cent of the world’s total? In contrast to
many European countries, the railways are
used more for long-distance bulky freight like
ores, grains, timber and machinery than for
passengers. The most dense rail network is
found in the highly industrialised and
urbanised region of East Central U.S.A. and
adjoining Canada.

In Canada, railways are in the public
sector and distributed all over the sparsely
populated areas. The transcontinental railways
carry the bulk of wheat and coal tonnage.

Australia has about 40, 000 km of
railways, of which 25 per cent are found in New
South Wales alone. The west-east Australian
National Railway line runs across the country
from Perth to Sydney. New Zealand’s railways
are mainly in the North Island to serve the
farming areas.

In South America, the rail network is the
most dense in two regions, namely, the Pampas
of Argentina and the coffee growing region of
Brazil which together account for 40 per cent
of South America’s total route length. Only Chile,
among the remaining countries has a
considerable route length linking coastal centres
with the mining sites in the interior. Peru, Bolivia,
Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela have short
single-track rail-lines from ports to the interior
with no inter-connecting links.

There is only one trans-continental rail
route linking Buenos Aires (Argentina) with
Valparaiso (Chile) across the Andes Mountains
through the Uspallatta Pass located at a height
of 3,900 m.

In Asia, rail network is the most dense in
the thickly populated areas of Japan, China and
India. Other countries have relatively few rail
routes. West Asia is the least developed in rail

 

facilities because of vast deserts and sparsely
populated regions.

1):) ‘IFJU KIJU W

TRAIN TO TIBET

The train Ouinghai-leet train is a

marvel that has no predecessor in the past.

The rail line stretches 1.956 km from

Xining tn Lhasa— 960 km 4.000 m above

sea level and the highest point is 5.072 m.

200 In higher than Feruvian railway in the Andes.
the tormer world‘s highest track. Abnut 550 km
of the tracks run on fruzeh earth

:‘IIJ \‘i ”13

Africa continent, despite being the
second largest, has only 40,000 km of
railways with South Africa alone accounting
for 18,000 km due to the concentration of
gold, diamond and copper mining activities.
The important routes of the continent are: (i)
the Benguela Railway through Angola to
Katanga—Zambia Copper Belt; (ii) the Tanzania
Railway from the Zambian Copper Belt to
Dar-es-Salaam on the coast; (iii) the Railway
through Botswana and Zimbabwe linking the
landlocked states to the South African
network; and (iv) the Blue Train from Cape
Town to Pretoria in the Republic of South
Africa. Elsewhere, as in Algeria, Senegal,
Nigeria, Kenya and Ethiopia, railway lines
connect port cities to interior centres but do
not form a good network with other countries.

Trans-Continental Railways

Trans—continental railways run across the
continent and link its two ends. They were
constructed for economic and political reasons
to facilitate long runs in different directions.
The following are the most important of these:

Trans-Siberian Railway

This is a trans—siberian Railways major rail
route of Russia runs from St. Petersburg in the
west to Vladivostok on the Pacific Coast in the
east passing through Moscow, Ufa, Novosibirsk,
Irkutsk, Chita and Khabarovsk. It is the most
important route inAsia and the longest (9,332 km) f

Transport and Communication

2019-20

 
    

(the: ..‘ , v.