(ﬂ

Double village: These settlements
extend on both sides of a river where
there is a bridge or a ferry.

§ -ﬂctjvitu

Identify these patterns on anytopographical sheetwhich
you have studied in Practical Work in Geography, Part
| (NCERT, 2006) in Class XI

Problems of Rural Settlements

Rural settlements in the developing countries
are large in number and poorly equipped with
infrastructure. They represent a great challenge
and opportunity for planners.

Supply of water to rural settlements in
developing countries is not adequate. People
in villages, particularly in mountainous and
arid areas have to walk long distances to fetch
drinking water. Water borne diseases such as
cholera and jaundice tend to be a common
problem. The countries of South Asia face
conditions of drought and ﬂood very often. Crop
cultivation sequences, in the absence of
irrigation, also suffer.

The general absence of toilet and garbage
disposal facilities cause health related problems.

The design and use of building materials
of houses vary from one ecological region to
another. The houses made up of mud, wood
and thatch, remain susceptible to damage
during heavy rains and ﬂoods, and require
proper maintenance every year. Most house
designs are typically deficient in proper
ventilation. Besides, the design of a house
includes the animal shed along with its fodder-
store within it. This is purposely done to keep
the domestic animals and their food properly
protected from wild animals.

Unmetalled roads and lack of modern
communication network creates a unique
problem. During rainy season, the settlements
remain cut off and pose serious difﬁculties in
providing emergency services. It is also difﬁcult
to provide adequate health and educational
infrastructure for their large rural population.
The problem is particularly serious where
proper villagisation has not taken place and
houses are scattered over a large area.

Urban Settlements

Rapid urban growth is a recent phenomenon.
Until recent times, few settlements reached the
population size of more than a few thousand
inhabitants. The first urban settlement to reach
a population of one million was the city of
London by around. AD. 18 10 By 1982
approximately 1 75 cities in the world had
crossed the one million population mark.
Presently 54 per cent of the world’s population
lives in urban settlements compared to only 3
per cent in the year 1800 (Table 10.1).

Table 10.1: Percentage of World's Population Living
in Urban Areas

 

Classiﬁcation of Urban Settlements

The definition of urban areas varies from one
country to another. Some of the common basis
of classification are size of population,
occupational structure and administrative
setup.

Population Size

It is an important criteria used by most countries
to define urban areas. The lower limit of the
population size for a settlement to be designated
as urban is 1,500 in Colombia, 2,000 in
Argentina and Portugal, 2,500 in U.S.A. and
Thailand, 5,000 in India and 30,000 in Japan.
Besides the size of population, density of 400
persons per sq km and share of non-agricultural
workers are taken into consideration in India.
Countries with low density of population may
choose a lower number as the cut-off figure
compared to densely populated countries. In
Denmark, Sweden and Finland, all places with
a population size of 250 persons are called
urban. The minimum population for a city is -

Fm mm: 3:»:- r r” 4;

2019—20