Canadian Highway links Vancouver in British
Columbia(west coast) to St. John’s City in
Newfoundland (east coast) and the Alaskan
Highway links Edmonton (Canada) to
Anchorage (Alaska).

The Pan-American Highway, a large
portion of which has been constructed, will
connect the countries of South America, Central
America and U.S.A.-Canada. The Trans-
Continental Stuart Highway connects Darwin
(north coast) and Melbourne via Tennant Creek
and Alice Springs in Australia.

Europe has a large number of vehicles and
a well-developed highway network. But
highways face a lot of competition from railways
and waterways.

In Russia, a dense highway network is
developed in the industrialised region west of
the Urals with Moscow as the hub. The
important Moscow-Vladivostok Highway serves
the region to the east. Due to the vast
geographical area, highways in Russia are not
as important as railways.

In China, highways criss—cross the country
connecting all major cities such as Tsungtso
(near Vietnam boundary), Shanghai (central
China), Guangzhou (south) and Beijing (north).
A new highway links Chengdu with Lhasa in
Tibet.

In India, there are many highways
linking the major towns and cities. For
example, National Highway No. 7 (NH 7),
connecting Varanasi with Kanya Kumari, is
the longest in the country. The Golden
Quadrilateral (G9) or Super Expressway is
underway to connect the four metropolitan
cities — New Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore,
Chennai, Kolkata and Hyderabad.

In Africa, a highway joins Algiers in the
north to Conakry in Guinea. Similarly, Cairo
is also connected to Cape Town.

Border Roads

Roads laid along international boundaries are
called border roads. They play an important
role in integrating people in remote areas with
‘ major cities and providing defence. Almost all

I I 68 Fundamentals ofHuman Geography

2019-20

countries have such roads to transport goods
to border villages and military camps.

Railways

Railways are a mode of land transport for
bulky goods and passengers over long
distances. The railway gauges vary in different
countries and are roughly classified as broad
(more than 1.5 m), standard (1.44 m), metre
gauge (1 m) and smaller gauges. The standard
gauge is used in the UK.

Commuter trains are very popular in U.K.,
USA, Japan and India. These carry millions
of passengers daily to and fro in the city. There
are about 13 lakh km of railways open for trafﬁc
in the world.

 

Fig. 8.4: Tube Train in Vienna

Europe has one of the most dense rail
networks in the world. There are about
4,40,000 km of railways, most of which is
double or multiple-tracked. Belgium has the
highest density of 1 km of railway for every 6.5
sq kms area. The industrial regions exhibit
some of the highest densities in the world. The
important rail heads are London, Paris,
Brussels, Milan, Berlin and Warsaw. Passenger
transport is more important than freight in
many of these countries. Underground railways
are important in London and Paris. Channel
Tunnel, operated by Euro Tunnel Group
through England, connects London with Paris.
Trans- continental railway lines have now lost