11092CHI4

CHAPTER

he ocean water is dynamic. Its physical

I characteristics like temperature,
salinity, density and the external

forces like of the sun, moon and the winds
inﬂuence the movement of ocean water. The
horizontal and vertical motions are common
in ocean water bodies. The horizontal motion
refers to the ocean currents and waves. The
vertical motion refers to tides. Ocean currents
are the continuous ﬂow of huge amount of
water in a definite direction while the waves
are the horizontal motion of water. Water moves
ahead from one place to another through ocean
currents while the water in the waves does not
move, but the wave trains move ahead. The
vertical motion refers to the rise and fall of water
in the oceans and seas. Due to attraction of
the sun and the moon, the ocean water is raised
up and falls down twice a day. The upwelling
of cold water from subsurface and the sinking
of surface water are also forms of vertical
motion of ocean water.

WAVES

Waves are actually the energy, not the water
as such, which moves across the ocean surface.
Water particles only travel in a small circle as a
wave passes. Wind provides energy to the
waves. Wind causes waves to travel in the ocean
and the energy is released on shorelines. The
motion of the surface water seldom affects the
stagnant deep bottom water of the oceans. As
a wave approaches the beach, it slows down.
This is due to the friction occurring between
the dynamic water and the sea ﬂoor. And, when
the depth of water is less than half the

MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER

wavelength of the wave, the wave breaks. The
largest waves are found in the open oceans.
Waves continue to grow larger as they move
and absorb energy from the wind.

Most of the waves are caused by the wind
driving against water. When a breeze of two
knots or less blows over calm water, small
ripples form and grow as the wind speed
increases until white caps appear in the
breaking waves. Waves may travel thousands
of km before rolling ashore, breaking and
dissolving as surf.

A wave’s size and shape reveal its origin.
Steep waves are fairly young ones and are
probably formed by local wind. Slow and
steady waves originate from far away places,
possibly from another hemisphere. The
maximum wave height is determined by the
strength of the wind, i.e. how long it blows and
the area over which it blows in a single direction.

Waves travel because wind pushes the
water body in its course while gravity pulls the
crests of the waves downward. The falling water
pushes the former troughs upward, and the

Wave travelling Crest CI‘CSt
toward the - falllng falhng
l'i t

\u//

Trough
rising

\ip//

Trough
rising

Figure 14. 1 : Motion of waves and water molecules

2019-2020