Roads

Road transport is the most economical for short
distances compared to railways. Freight
transport by road is gaining importance
because it offers door-to-door service. But
unmetalled roads, though simple in
construction, are not effective and serviceable
for all seasons. During the rainy season these
become unmotorable and even the metalled
ones are seriously handicapped during heavy
rains and ﬂoods. In such conditions, the high
embankment of rail-tracks and the efﬁcient
maintenance of railway transport service, is an
effective solution. But the rail kilometrage being
small cannot serve the needs of vast and
developing countries at a low cost. Roads,
therefore, play a vital role in a nation’s trade
and commerce and for promoting tourism.

The quality of the roads varies greatly
between developed and developing countries
because road construction and maintenance
require heavy expenditure. In developed
countries good quality roads are universal and
provide long-distance links in the form of
motorways, autobahns (Germany), and inter—
state highways for speedy movement. Lorries,
of increasing size and power to carry heavy
loads, are common. But unfortunately, the
world’s road system is not well developed.

The world’s total motorable road length
is only about 15 million km, of which North
America accounts for 33 per cent. The highest
road density and the highest number of
vehicles are registered in this continent
compared to Western Europe.

Traffic Flows: Traffic on roads has
increased dramatically in recent years. When
the road network cannot cope with the demands
of trafﬁc, congestion occurs. City roads suffer
from chronic trafﬁc congestion. Peaks (high
points) and troughs (low points) of trafﬁc ﬂow
can be seen on roads at particular times of the
day, for example, peaks occurring during the
rush hour before and after work. Most of the
cities in the world have been facing the problem
of congestion.

Think on these lines for a
better tomorrow . . .

URBAN TRANSPORT SOLUTIONS
Higher Parking Fee
Mass Rapid Transit (MRT)
Improved Public Bus Service

Expressways

Highways

Highways are metalled roads connecting distant
places. They are constructed in a manner for
unobstructed vehicular movement. As such
these are 80 m wide, with separate trafﬁc lanes,
bridges, ﬂyovers and dual carriageways to
facilitate uninterrupted trafﬁc ﬂow. In developed
countries, every city and port town is linked
through highways.

 

Fig. 8.3 : Dharmavaram ’ﬂmi National Highway,
India

In North America, highway density is high,
about 0.65 km per sq km. Every place is within
20 km distance from a highway. Cities located
on the Paciﬁc coast (west) are well-connected
with those of the Atlantic Coast (east). Likewise,
the cities of Canada in the north are linked with
those of Mexico in the south. The Trans-

Transport and Communication

2019-20

 

67