128

during photosynthesis and is released in the
atmosphere through transpiration and
respiration processes of plants.

The Nitrogen Cycle

Nitrogen is a major constituent of the
atmosphere comprising about seventy-eight
per cent of the atmospheric gases. It is also an
essential constituent of different organic
compounds such as the amino acids, nucleic
acids, proteins, vitamins and pigments. Only
a few types of organisms like certain species of
soil bacteria and blue green algae are capable
of utilising it directly in its gaseous form.
Generally, nitrogen is usable only after it is
fixed. Ninety per cent of fixed nitrogen is
biological. The principal source of free nitrogen
is the action of soil micro-organisms and
associated plant roots on atmospheric nitrogen
found in pore spaces of the soil. Nitrogen can
also be fixed in the atmosphere by lightning and
cosmic radiation. In the oceans, some marine
animals can fix it. After atmospheric nitrogen
has been ﬁxed into an available form, green
plants can assimilate it. Herbivorous animals
feeding on plants, in turn, consume some of it.
Dead plants and animals, excretion of
nitrogenous wastes are converted into nitrites
by the action of bacteria present in the soil.
Some bacteria can even convert nitrites into
nitrates that can be used again by green plants.
There are still other types of bacteria capable
of converting nitrates into free nitrogen, a
process known as denitriﬁcation (Figure l 5.3).

l

 

 

 

 

Atmospheric
Nitrogen I
l (M “
Atmospheric ‘ Biological , Industrial I
Fixation J Fixation "l Fixation

  

[ Compounds w!

Dentriﬁcation

 

Figure 15.3 : Nitrogen Cycle

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Other Mineral Cycles

Other than carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and
hydrogen being the principal geochemical
components of the biosphere, many other
minerals also occur as critical nutrients for
plant and animal life. These mineral elements
required by living organisms are obtained
initially from inorganic sources such as
phosphorus, sulphur, calcium and potassium.
They usually occur as salts dissolved in soil
water or lakes, streams and seas. Mineral salts
come directly from the earth’s crust by
weathering where the soluble salts enter the
water cycle, eventually reaching the sea. Other
salts are returned to the earth’s surface through
sedimentation, and after weathering, they again
enter the cycle. All living organisms fulﬁll their
mineral requirements from mineral solutions
in their environments. Other animals receive
their mineral needs from the plants and animals
they consume. After the death of living
organisms, the minerals are returned to the soil
and water through decomposition and ﬂow.

Ecological Balance

Ecological balance is a state of dynamic
equilibrium within a community of organisms
in a habitat or ecosystem. It can happen when
the diversity of the living organisms remains
relatively stable. Gradual changes do take
place but that happens only through natural
succession. It can also be explained as a stable
balance in the numbers of each species in an
ecosystem. This occurs through competition
and cooperation between different organisms
where population remains stable. This balance
is brought about by the fact that certain species
compete with one another determined by the
environment in which they grow. This balance
is also attained by the fact that some species
depend on others for their food and
sustenance. Such accounts are encountered
in vast grasslands where the herbivorous
animals (deer, zebras, buffaloes, etc.) are found
in plenty. On the other hand, the carnivorous
animals (tigers, lions, etc.) that are not usually
in large numbers, hunt and feed on the
herbivores, thereby controlling their
population. In the plants, any disturbance in
the native forests such as clearing the forest
for shifting cultivation usually brings about a

2019-2020