Vancouver
___________ . .............

Shanghai ' v,.¢'\'"olroharna

were!"

Singapore _

“H'Jiem sydnay
Fremanlléw- -..
.,_,'_"FE'P..... .

Not to Scate

 

.San Francisco
‘ New Orl'rlaans

Panama...
”'2'" Colon

k,._.-"'Honnltrluv w"-
-’ 2 Ca1lao aarerh'”
. O

MAJOR SEA ROUTES
- SEA PORTS

 

The intematr'ana! Boundary shown in this map may not to be nonsr‘dered as authentic
Fig. 8.9: Major Sea Routes and Sea Ports

regions of the world. The foreign trade over this
route is greater than that of the rest of the world
combined. One fourth of the world’s foreign
trade moves on this route. It is, therefore, the
busiest in the world and otherwise, called the
Big Trunk Route. Both the coasts have highly
advanced ports and harbour facilities.

~\\ -ﬂctjvity

Find out some of the important ports on the coast of
U.S.A. and Western Europe in your atlas.

The Mediterranean-Indian Ocean Sea
Route

This sea route passes through the heart of
the Old World and serves more countries and
people than any other route. Port Said, Aden,
Mumbai, Colombo and Singapore are some
of the important ports on this route. The
construction of Suez Canal has greatly
reduced the distance and time as compared
to the earlier route through the Cape of Good
Hope, which was longer than the route
through Suez Canal.

The Cape of Good Hope Sea Route

This trade route connects the highly
industrialised Western European region with West
Africa, South Africa, South-east Asia and the
commercial agriculture and livestock economies
of Australia and New Zealand. The volume of
trade and traffic between both East and West
Africa is on the increase due to the development
of the rich natural resources such as gold,
diamond, copper, tin, groundnut, oil palm,
coffee and fruits.

The Southern Atlantic Sea Route

This sea route is another important one across
the Atlantic Ocean which connects West
European and West African countries with
Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay in South
America. The traffic is far less on this route
because of the limited development and
population in South America and Africa. Only
southeastern Brazil and Plata estuary and
parts of South Africa have large-scale industries.
There is also little traffic on the route between
Rio de Janeiro and Cape Town because both
South America and Africa have similar
products and resources.

‘ I'rrtrwgmrt and (formingMention

2019-20

 

73'"