The Mississippi Waterways

The Mississippi-Ohio waterway connects the
interior part of U.S.A. with the Gulf of Mexico
in the south. Large steamers can go through
this route up to Minneapolis.

AIR TRANSPORT

Air transport is the fastest means of
transportation, but it is very costly. Being fast,
it is preferred by passengers for long-distance
travel. Valuable cargo can be moved rapidly on
a world-wide scale. It is often the only means
to reach inaccessible areas. Air transport has
brought about a connectivity revolution in the
world. The frictions created by mountainous
snow fields or inhospitable desert terrains have
been overcome. The accessibility has increased.
The airplane brings varied articles to the
Eskimos in Northern Canada unhindered by
the frozen ground. In the Himalayan region, the
routes are often obstructed due to landslides,
avalanches or heavy snow fall. At such times,
air travel is the only alternative to reach a place.
Airways also have great strategic importance.
The air strikes by US. and British forces in Iraq
bears testimony to this fact. The airways
network is expanding very fast.

 

Fig. 8.15: An Aeroplane at Salsburg Airport

The manufacturing of aircrafts and their
operations require elaborate infrastructure like
hangars, landing, fuelling, and maintenance
facilities for the aircrafts. The construction of
airports is also very expensive and has developed
more in highly industrialised countries where
there is a large volume of trafﬁc.

At present no place in the world is more
than 35 hours away. This startling fact has been
made possible due to people who build and ﬂy
airplanes. Travel by air can now be measured
by hours and minutes instead of years and
months. Frequent air services are available to
many parts of the world. Although, U.K.
pioneered the use of commercial jet transport,
U.S.A. developed largely post-War international
civil aviation. Today, more than 250
commercial airlines offer regular services to
different parts of the world. Recent
developments can change the future course of
air transport. Supersonic aircraft, cover the
distance between London and New York within
three and a half hours.

Inter-Continental Air Routes

In the Northern Hemisphere, there is a distinct
east-west belt of inter-continental air routes.
Dense network exists in Eastern U.SA., Western
Europe and Southeast Asia. U.S.A. alone
accounts for 60 per cent of the airways of the
world. New York, London, Paris, Amsterdam,
Frankfurt Rome, Moscow, Karachi, New Delhi,
Mumbai, Bangkok, Singapore, Tokyo, San
Francisco, Los Angeles and Chicago are the
nodal points where air routes converge or
radiate to all continents.

Africa, Asiatic part of Russia and South
America lack air services. There are limited air
services between 10-35 latitudes in the
Southern hemisphere due to sparser
population, limited landmass and economic
development.

PIPELINES

Pipelines are used extensively to transport
liquids and gases such as water, petroleum
and natural gas for an uninterrupted ﬂow.
Water supplied through pipelines is familiar
to all. Cooking gas or LPG is supplied through
pipelines in many parts of the world. Pipelines
can also be used to transport liquidified coal.
In New Zealand, milk is being supplied through
pipelines from farms to factories.

In U.S.A. there is a dense network of oil
pipelines from the producing areas to the .

_ ’I'rmisgﬁrmf and Commim{curtain

 

2019-20