90

4000 m

Warm air

 

Km600 400 200 0 200 400 600 800km

4000 m
Warm air

 

 

Km600 460 260 0 260 460 600 sookm

Cold Front

 

 

"Occluded Front

Figure 10.8 : Vertical Sections of : (a) Warm Front;
(b) Cold Front; (c) Occluded Front

towards the warm air mass, its contact zone is
called the cold front, whereas if the warm air
mass moves towards the cold air mass, the
contact zone is a warm front. If an air mass is
fully lifted above the land surface, it is called
the occluded front. The fronts occur in middle
latitudes and are characterised by steep gradient
in temperature and pressure. They bring
abrupt changes in temperature and cause the
air to rise to form clouds and cause precipitation.

Extra Tropical Cyclones

The systems developing in the mid and high
latitude, beyond the tropics are called the
middle latitude or extra tropical cyclones. The
passage of front causes abrupt changes in the
weather conditions over the area in the middle
and high latitudes.

Extra tropical cyclones form along the polar
front. Initially, the front is stationary. In the
northern hemisphere, warm air blows from the
south and cold air from the north of the front.
When the pressure drops along the front, the
warm air moves northwards and the cold air
move towards, south setting in motion an

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

anticlockwise cyclonic circulation. The cyclonic
circulation leads to a well developed extra
tropical cyclone, with a warm front and a cold
front. The plan and cross section of a well
developed cyclone is given in Figure 10.9.
There are pockets of warm air or warm sector
wedged between the forward and the rear cold
air or cold sector. The warm air glides over the
cold air and a sequence of clouds appear over
the sky ahead of the warm front and cause
precipitation. The cold front approaches the
warm air from behind and pushes the warm
air up. As a result, cumulus clouds develop
along the cold front. The cold front moves faster
than the warm front ultimately overtaking the
warm front. The warm air is completely lifted
up and the front is occluded and the cyclone
dissipates.

The processes of wind circulation both at
the surface and aloft are closely interlinked.
The extra tropical cyclone differs from the
tropical cyclone in number of ways. The extra
tropical cyclones have a clear frontal system

 

 

 

 

Figure 10. 9 : Extra tropical cyclones

2019-2020