WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE

long. Such rain is common in the summer or
in the hotter part of the day. It is very common
in the equatorial regions and interior parts of
the continents, particularly in the northern
hemisphere.

Orographic Rain

When the saturated air mass comes across a
mountain, it is forced to ascend and as it rises,
it expands; the temperature falls, and the
moisture is condensed. The chief characteristic
of this sort of rain is that the windward slopes
receive greater rainfall. After giving rain on the
windward side, when these winds reach the
other slope, they descend, and their
temperature rises. Then their capacity to take
in moisture increases and hence, these leeward
slopes remain rainless and dry. The area
situated on the leeward side, which gets less
rainfall is known as the rain-shadow area. It
is also known as the relief rain.

Cyclonic Rain

You have already read about extra tropical
cyclones and cyclonic rain in Chapter 10.
Please consult Chapter 10 to understand
cyclonic rainfall.

World Distribution of Rainfall

Different places on the earth’s surface receive
different amounts of rainfall in a year and that
too in different seasons.

In general, as we proceed from the equator
towards the poles, rainfall goes on decreasing
steadily. The coastal areas of the world receive
greater amounts of rainfall than the interior of

97

the continents. The rainfall is more over the
oceans than on the landmasses of the world
because of being great sources of water.
Between the latitudes 35° and 400 N and S of
the equator, the rain is heavier on the eastern
coasts and goes on decreasing towards the
west. But, between 450 and 650 N and S of
equator, due to the westerlies, the rainfall is
first received on the western margins of the
continents and it goes on decreasing towards
the east. Wherever mountains run parallel to
the coast, the rain is greater on the coastal
plain, on the windward side and it decreases
towards the leeward side.

On the basis of the total amount of annual
precipitation, major precipitation regimes of the
world are identified as follows.

The equatorial belt, the windward slopes
of the mountains along the western coasts in
the cool temperate zone and the coastal areas
of the monsoon land receive heavy rainfall of
over 200 cm per annum. Interior continental
areas receive moderate rainfall varying from
100 - 200 cm per annum. The coastal areas of
the continents receive moderate amount of
rainfall. The central parts of the tropical land
and the eastern and interior parts of the
temperate lands receive rainfall varying
between 50 - 100 cm per annum. Areas lying
in the rain shadow zone of the interior of the
continents and high latitudes receive very low
rainfall-less than 50 cm per annum. Seasonal
distribution of rainfall provides an important
aspect to judge its effectiveness. In some
regions rainfall is distributed evenly
throughout the year such as in the equatorial
belt and in the western parts of cool temperate
regions.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following is the most important constituent of the

atmosphere for human beings?

(a) Water vapour

(b) Nitrogen

(0) Dust particle
(d) Oxygen

2019-2020