The North Paciﬁc Sea Route

Trade across the vast North Pacific Ocean
moves by several routes which converge at
Honolulu. The direct route on the Great Circle
links Vancouver and Yokohama and reduces
the travelling distance (2,480 km) by half.

This sea route links the ports on the west-
coast of North America with those of Asia. These
are Vancouver, Seattle, Portland, San Francisco
and Los Angeles on the American side and
Yokohama, Kobe, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Manila
and Singapore on the Asian side.

The South Pacific Sea Route

This sea route connects Western Europe and
North America with Australia, New Zealand and
the scattered Pacific islands via the Panama
Canal. This route is also used for reaching Hong
Kong, Philippines and Indonesia. The distance
covered between Panama and Sydney is
12,000 km. Honolulu is an important port on
this route.

Coastal Shipping

It is obvious that water transport is a cheaper
mode. While oceanic routes connect different
countries, coastal shipping is a convenient
mode of transportation with long coastlines,
e.g. USA, China and India. Shenzhen States
in Europe are most suitably placed for coastal
shipping connecting one member’s coast with
the other. If properly developed, coastal shipping
can reduce the congestion on the land routes.

Shipping Canals

The Suez and the Panama Canals are two vital
man-made navigation canals or waterways
which serve as gateways of commerce for both
the eastern and western worlds.

The Suez Canal

This canal had been constructed in 1869 in
Egypt between Port Said in the north and Port
Suez in the south linking the Mediterranean
Sea and the Red Sea. It gives Europe a new

\ gateway to the Indian Ocean and reduces direct

hindammrials {gunman anyways; ‘

      
 

sea-route distance between Liverpool and
Colombo compared to the Cape of Good Hope
route. It is a sea-level canal without locks
which is about 160 km and l l to 15 m deep.
About 100 ships travel daily and each ship
takes 10- 12 hours to cross this canal. The tolls
are so heavy that some ﬁnd it cheaper to go by
the longer Cape Route whenever the
consequent delay is not important. A railway
follows the canal to Suez, and from Ismailia
there is a branch line to Cairo. A navigable
fresh-water canal from the Nile also joins the
Suez Canal in Ismailia to supply fresh-water to
Port Said and Suez.

 

  

,. l.w......mg¥. tons”
Shirbin -.-"/ r'..-—-"' ll

  
   
  

/

in": .‘ ,2"
.n'( SImMIawe-n / 'Salhia

.I'

// Zagazl "we; Ismaillya .a"

~~_. ‘--__ — _,—» \

,2'

Bi! Hassan Lake 5

_ SHIP CANAL
RNLWAI’S
r- HLSH WM 2 H CANAL

 

 

“a: c an.

 

 

Fig. 8.10 : Suez Canal

The Panama Canal

This canal connects the Atlantic Ocean in the
east to the Pacific Ocean in the west. It has been
constructed across the Panama Isthmus
between Panama City and Colon by the US.
government which purchased 8 km of area on
either side and named it the Canal Zone. The
Canal is about 72 km. long and involves a very

 

2019-20