LIFE ON THE EARTH

change in the species distribution. This change
is due to competition where the secondary
forest species such as grasses, bamboos or
pines overtakes the native species changing
the original forest structure. This is called
succession.

Ecological balance may be disturbed due
to the introduction of new species, natural
hazards or human causes. Human interference
has affected the balance of plant communities
leading to disturbances in the ecosystems.
Such disturbances bring about numerous
secondary successions. Human pressure on
the earth’s resources has put a heavy toll on

129

the ecosystem. This has destroyed its originality
and has caused adverse effects to the general
environment. Ecological imbalances have
brought many natural calamities like
ﬂoods, landslides, diseases, erratic climatic
occurrences, etc.

There is a very close relationship between
the plant and animal communities within
particular habitats. Diversity of life in a
particular area can be employed as an
indicator of the habitat factor. Proper
knowledge and understanding of such factors
provide a strong base for protecting and
conserving the ecosystems.

EXERCISES .

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following is included in biosphere?

(a) only plants

(b) all living and non-living organisms

(c) only animals

(d) all living organisms

(ii) Tropical grasslands are also known as :

(a) the prairies

(b) the savannas

(c) the steppes

((1) none of the above

(iii) Oxygen combines with iron found in the rocks to form :

(a) iron carbonate

(b) iron nitrites

(c) iron oxides

(d) iron sulphate

(iv) During photosynthesis, carbon dioxide combines with water in the

presence of sunlight to form :
(a) proteins

(b) amino acids

(c) carbohydrates

(d) vitamins

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What do you understand by the term ‘ecology’?

(ii) What is an ecological system? Identify the major types of ecosystems in

the world.

(iii) What is a food-chain? Give one example of a grazing food-chain identifying

the various levels.

(iv) What do you understand by the term ‘food web’? Give examples.

(v) What is a biome?

2019-2020