WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE

the temperature of the air is reduced to dew
point with its volume remaining constant; (ii)
when both the volume and the temperature are
reduced; (iv) when moisture is added to the air
through evaporation. However, the most
favourable condition for condensation is the
decrease in air temperature.

After condensation the water vapour or the
moisture in the atmosphere takes one of the
following forms — dew, frost, fog and clouds.
Forms of condensation can be classiﬁed on the
basis of temperature and location.
Condensation takes place when the dew point
is lower than the freezing point as well as
higher than the freezing point.

Dew

When the moisture is deposited in the form of
water droplets on cooler surfaces of solid
objects (rather than nuclei in air above the
surface) such as stones, grass blades and plant
leaves, it is known as dew. The ideal conditions
for its formation are clear sky, calm air, high
relative humidity, and cold and long nights.
For the formation of dew, it is necessary that
the dew point is above the freezing point.

Frost

Frost forms on cold surfaces when
condensation takes place below freezing point
(0°C), i.e. the dew point is at or below the
freezing point. The excess moisture is deposited
in the form of minute ice crystals instead of
water droplets. The ideal conditions for the
formation of white frost are the same as those
for the formation of dew, except that the air
temperature must be at or below the freezing
point.

Fog and Mist

When the temperature of an air mass
containing a large quantity of water vapour falls
all of a sudden, condensation takes place within
itself on ﬁne dust particles. So, the fog is a cloud
with its base at or very near to the ground.
Because of the fog and mist, the visibility
becomes poor to zero. In urban and industrial
centres smoke provides plenty of nuclei which
help the formation of fog and mist. Such a

95

condition when fog is mixed with smoke, is
described as smog. The only difference between
the mist and fog is that mist contains more
moisture than the fog. In mist each nuceli
contains a thicker layer of moisture. Mists are
frequent over mountains as the rising warm
air up the slopes meets a cold surface. Fogs
are drier than mist and they are prevalent where
warm currents of air come in contact with cold
currents. Fogs are mini clouds in which
condensation takes place around nuclei
provided by the dust, smoke, and the salt
particles.

Clouds

Cloud is a mass of minute water droplets or
tiny crystals of ice formed by the condensation
of the water vapour in free air at considerable
elevations. As the clouds are formed at some
height over the surface of the earth, they take
various shapes. According to their height,
expanse, density and transparency or
opaqueness clouds are grouped under four
types 2 (i) cirrus; (ii) cumulus; (iii) stratus;
(iv) nimbus.

Cirrus

Cirrus clouds are formed at high altitudes
(8,000 - 12,000m). They are thin and detatched
clouds having a feathery appearance. They are
always white in colour.

Cumulus

Cumulus clouds look like cotton wool. They
are generally formed at a height of 4,000 -
7,000 m. They exist in patches and can be seen
scattered here and there. They have a ﬂat base.

Stratus

As their name implies, these are layered clouds
covering large portions of the sky. These clouds
are generally formed either due to loss of heat
or the mixing of air masses with different
temperatures.

Nimbus

Nimbus clouds are black or dark gray. They
form at middle levels or very near to the surface

2019-2020