Problems of Urban Settlements

People ﬂock to cities to avail of employment
opportunities and civic amenities. Since most
cities in developing countries are unplanned,
it creates severe congestion. Shortage of
housing, vertical expansion and growth of
slums are characteristic features of modern
cities of developing countries. In many cities
an increasing proportion of the population
lives in substandard housing, e. g. slums and
squatter settlements. In most million plus
cities in India, one in four inhabitants lives in
illegal settlements, which are growing twice as
fast as the rest of the cities. Even in the Asia
Pacific countries, around 60 per cent of the
urban population lives in squatter settlements.

 

Fig. 10.1 1 : Slums

v

What is a Healthy City?

World Health Organisation (WHO) suggests
that, among other things, a ‘healthy city’
must have:

A ’Clean’ and ‘Safe’ environment.

Meets the ‘Basic Needs’ of ‘All’ its
inhabitants.

Involves the ‘Community’ in local

government.
Provides easily accessible ‘Health’ service.

I I 100 Fundamentals ofHuman Geography

2019—20

Economic Problems

The decreasing employment opportunities in
the rural as well as smaller urban areas of the
developing countries consistently push the
population to the urban areas. The enormous
migrant population generates a pool of un-
skilled and semi-skilled labour force, which is
already saturated in urban areas.

Socio-cultural Problems

Cities in the developing countries suffer from
several social ills. Insufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources
fail to create adequate social infrastructure
catering to the basic needs of the huge
population. The available educational and
health facilities remain beyond the reach of the
urban poor. Health indices also, present a
gloomy picture in cities of developing countries.
Lack of employment and education tends to
aggravate the crime rates. Male selective
migration to the urban areas distorts the sex
ratio in these cities.

Environmental Problems

The large urban population in developing
countries not only uses but also disposes off a
huge quantity of water and all types of waste
materials. Many cities of the developing
countries even find it extremely difﬁcult to
provide the minimum required quantity of
potable water and water for domestic and
industrial uses. An improper sewerage system
creates unhealthy conditions. Massive use of
traditional fuel in the domestic as well as the
industrial sector severely pollutes the air. The
domestic and industrial wastes are either let
into the general sewerages or dumped without
treatment at unspecified locations. Huge
concrete structures erected to accommodate the
population and economic play a very conducive
role to create heat islands.

Urban Strategy

The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) has outlined these
priorities as part of its ‘Urban Strategy’.