92

Thunderstorms and Tornadoes

Other severe local storms are thunderstorms
and tornadoes. They are of short duration,
occurring over a small area but are violent.
Thunderstorms are caused by intense
convection on moist hot days. A thunderstorm
is a well-grown cumulonimbus cloud
producing thunder and lightening. When the
clouds extend to heights where sub-zero
temperature prevails, hails are formed and they
come down as hailstorm. If there is insufﬁcient
moisture, a thunderstorm can generate dust-
storms. A thunderstorm is characterised by
intense updraft of rising warm air, which
causes the clouds to grow bigger and rise to

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

greater height. This causes precipitation. Later,
downdraft brings down to earth the cool air
and the rain. From severe thunderstorms
sometimes spiralling wind descends like a
trunk of an elephant with great force, with very
low pressure at the centre, causing massive
destruction on its way. Such a phenomenon is
called a tornado. Tornadoes generally occur
in middle latitudes. The tornado over the sea
is called water spouts.

These violent storms are the manifestation
of the atmosphere’s adjustments to varying
energy distribution. The potential and heat
energies are converted into kinetic energy in
these storms and the restless atmosphere again
returns to its stable state.

m, EXERCISES 7

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) If the surface air pressure is 1,000 mb, the air pressure at 1 km above the

surface will be:
(a) 700 mb
(b) 1,100 mb

(C) 900 mb
(CI) 1,300 mb

(ii) The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone normally occurs:

(a) near the Equator

(0) near the Tropic of Capricorn

(b) near the Tropic of Cancer

(d) near the Arctic Circle

(iii) The direction of wind around a low pressure in northern hemisphere is:

(a) clockwise

(b) perpendicular to isobars

(c) anti-clock wise

(d) parallel to isobars

(iv) Which one of the following is the source region for the formation of air

masses?
(a) the Equatorial forest

(b) the Himalayas

(c) the Siberian Plain

(d) the Deccan Plateau

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What is the unit used in measuring pressure? Why is the pressure measured
at station level reduced to the sea level in preparation of weather maps?

(ii) While the pressure gradient force is from north to south, i.e. from the
subtropical high pressure to the equator in the northern hemisphere,
why are the winds north easterlies in the tropics.

(iii) What are the geotrophic winds?

(iv) Explain the land and sea breezes.

2019-2020