300 in Iceland, whereas in Canada and
Venezuela, it is 1,000 persons.

Occupational Structure

In some countries, such as India, the major
economic activities in addition to the size of the
population in designating a settlement as urban
are also taken as a criterion. Similarly, in Italy, a
settlement is called urban, if more than 50 per
cent of its economically productive population
is engaged in non-agricultural pursuits. India
has set this criterion at 75 per cent.

Administration

The administrative setup is a criterion for
classifying a settlement as urban in some
countries. For example, in India, a settlement
of any size is classified as urban, if it has a
municipality, Cantonment Board or Notified
Area Council. Similarly, in Latin American
countries, such as Brazil and Bolivia, any
administrative centre is considered urban
irrespective of its population size.

Location

Location of urban centres is examined with
reference to their function. For example, the
sitting requirements of a holiday resort are quite
different from that of an industrial town, a
military centre or a seaport. Strategic towns
require sites offering natural defence; mining
towns require the presence of economically
valuable minerals; industrial towns generally
need local energy supplies or raw materials;
tourist centres require attractive scenery, or a
marine beach, a spring with medicinal water
or historical relics, ports require a harbour etc.

Locations of the earliest urban settlements
were based on the availability of water, building
materials and fertile land. Today, while these
considerations still remain valid, modern
technology plays a significant role in locating
urban settlements far away from the source of
these materials. Piped water can be supplied
to a distant settlement, building material can
be transported from long distances.

Apart from site, the situation plays an
‘\ important role in the expansion of towns. The

 

2019—20

urban centres which are located close to an
important trade route have experienced rapid
development.

Functions of Urban Centres

The earliest towns were centres of
administration, trade, industry, defence and
religious importance. The significance of defence
and religion as differentiating functions has
declined in general, but other functions have
entered the list. Today, several new functions,
such as, recreational, residential, transport,
mining, manufacturing and most recently
activities related to information technology are
carried on in specialised towns. Some of these
functions do not necessarily require the urban
centre to have any fundamental relationship
with their neighbouring rural areas.

f .

What would be the effects of Information _/
and Communication Technology (ICT) as J
a function on the development of existing

and new settlements?

§ .Plctivitu

Prepare a list of cities where earlier functions have been
replaced by newer ones.

In spite of towns performing multiple
functions we refer to their dominant function.
For example, we think of Sheffield as an
industrial city, London as a port city,
Chandigarh as an administrative city and so
on. Large cities have a rather greater diversity
of functions. Besides, all cities are dynamic and
over a period of time may develop new functions.
Most of the early nineteenth-century fishing
ports in England have now developed tourism.
Many of the old market towns are now known
for manufacturing activities. Towns and cities
are classiﬁed into the following categories.

Administrative Towns

National capitals, which house the administrative
ofﬁces of central governments, such as New Delhi,
Canberra, Beijing, Addis Ababa, Washington
DC, and London etc. are called administrative