GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE

Put together, they mean description of the earth.
The earth has always been seen as the abode
of human beings and thus, scholars deﬁned
geography as, “the description of the earth as
the abode of human beings”. You are aware of
the fact that reality is always multifaceted and
the ‘earth’ is also multi-dimensional, that is
why many disciplines from natural sciences
such as geology, pedology, oceanography,
botany, zoology and meteorology and a
number of sister disciplines in social sciences
such as economics, history, sociology, political
science, anthropology, etc. study different
aspects of the earth’s surface. Geography is
different from other sciences in its subject
matter and methodology but at the same time,
it is closely related to other disciplines.
Geography derives its data base from all the
natural and social sciences and attempts their
synthesis.

We have noted that there exist variations
over the surface of the earth in its physical as
well as cultural environment. A number of
phenomena are similar and many are dissimilar.
It was, therefore, logical to perceive geography
as the study of areal differentiation. Thus,
geography was perceived to study all those
phenomena which vary over space.
Geographers do not study only the variations
in the phenomena over the earth’s surface
(space) but also study the associations with
the other factors which cause these variations.
For example, cropping patterns differ from
region to region but this variation in cropping
pattern, as a phenomenon, is related to
variations in soils, climates, demands in the
market, capacity of the farmer to invest and
technological inputs available to her/ him.
Thus, the concern of geography is to find out
the causal relationship between any two
phenomena or between more than one
phenomenon.

A geographer explains the phenomena in
a frame of cause and effect relationship, as it
does not only help in interpretation but also
foresees the phenomena in future.

The geographical phenomena, both the
physical and human, are not static but highly
dynamic. They change over time as a result of
the interactive processes between ever

3

changing earth and untiring and ever-active
human beings. Primitive human societies were
directly dependent on their immediate
environment. Geography, thus, is concerned
with the study of Nature and Human
interactions as an integrated whole. ‘Human’
is an integral part of ‘nature’ and ‘nature’ has
the imprints of ‘human’. ‘Nature’ has inﬂuenced
different aspects of human life. Its imprints can
be noticed on food, clothing, shelter and
occupation. Human beings have come to terms
with nature through adaptation and
modiﬁcation. As you already know, the present
society has passed the stage of primitive
societies, which were directly dependent on
their immediate physical environment for
sustenance. Present societies have modified
their natural environment by inventing and
using technology and thus, have expanded the
horizon of their operation by appropriating and
utilising the resources provided by nature. With
the gradual development of technology, human
beings were able to loosen the shackles of their
physical environment. Technology helped in
reducing the harshness of labour, increased
labour efficiency and provided leisure to
human beings to attend to the higher needs of
life. It also increased the scale of production
and the mobility of labour.

The interaction between the physical
environment and human beings has been very
succinctly described by a poet in the following
dialogue between ‘human’ and ‘nature’ (God).
You created the soil, I created the cup, you
created night, I created the lamp. You created
wilderness, hilly terrains and deserts; I
created ﬂower beds and gardens. Human
beings have claimed their contribution using
natural resources. With the help of technology,
human beings moved from the stage of
necessity to a stage of freedom. They have put
their imprints everywhere and created new
possibilities in collaboration with nature. Thus,
we now find humanised nature and
naturalised human beings and geography
studies this interactive relationship. The space
got organised with the help of the means of
transportation and communication network.
The links (routes) and nodes (settlements of all
types and hierarchies) integrated the space and

2019-2020