4

gradually, it got organised. As a social science
discipline, geography studies the ‘spatial
organisation’ and ‘spatial integration’.

Geography as a discipline is concerned with
three sets of questions:

(i) Some questions are related to the
identiﬁcation of the patterns of natural
and cultural features as found over the
surface of the earth. These are the
questions about what?

(ii) Some questions are related to the
distribution of the natural and human /
cultural features over the surface of the
earth. These are the questions about
where?

Taken together, both these questions take
care of distributional and locational aspects of
the natural and cultural features. These
questions provided inventorised information of
what features and where located. It was a very
popular approach during the colonial period.
These two questions did not make geography
a scientiﬁc discipline till the third question was
added.

(iii) The third question is related to the
explanation or the causal relationships
between features and the processes and
phenomena. This aspect of geography
is related to the question, why?

Geography as a discipline is related to
space and takes note of spatial characteristics
and attributes. It studies the patterns of
distribution, location and concentration of
phenomena over space and interprets them
providing explanations for these patterns. It
takes note of the associations and inter-
relationships between the phenomena over
space and interprets them providing
explanations for these patterns. It also takes
note of the associations and inter-relationships
between the phenomena resulting from the
dynamic interaction between human beings
and their physical environment.

GEOGRAPHY As AN INTEGRATING DISCIPLINE

Geography is a discipline of synthesis. It
attempts spatial synthesis, and history
attempts temporal synthesis. Its approach is
holistic in nature. It recognises the fact that
the world is a system of interdependencies.

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

The present world is being perceived as a global
village. The distances have been reduced by
better means of transportation increasing
accessibility. The audio-visual media and
information technology have enriched the data
base. Technology has provided better chances
of monitoring natural phenomena as well as
the economic and social parameters.
Geography as an integrating discipline has
interface with numerous natural and social
sciences. All the sciences, whether natural or
social, have one basic objective, of
understanding the reality. Geography
attempts to comprehend the associations of
phenomena as related in sections of reality.
Figure 1.1 shows the relationship of geography
with other sciences. Every discipline, concerned
with scientific knowledge is linked with
geography as many of their elements vary over
space. Geography helps in understanding the
reality in totality in its spatial perspective.
Geography, thus, not only takes note of the
differences in the phenomena from place to
place but integrates them holistically which
may be different at other places. A geographer
is required to have a broad understanding of
all the related fields, to be able to logically
integrate them. This integration can be
understood with some examples. Geography
inﬂuences historical events. Spatial distance
itself has been a very potent factor to alter the
course of history of the world. Spatial depth
provided defence to many countries,
particularly in the last century. In traditional
warfare, countries with large size in area, gain
time at the cost of space. The defence provided
by oceanic expanse around the countries of
the new world has protected them from wars
being imposed on their soil. If we look at the
historical events world over, each one of them
can be interpreted geographically.

In India, Himalayas have acted as great
barriers and provided protection but the
passes provided routes to the migrants and
invaders from Central Asia. The sea coast has
encouraged contact with people from East and
Southeast Asia, Europe and Africa. Navigation
technology helped European countries to
colonise a number of countries of Asia and
Africa, including India as they got accessibility

2019-2020