132

Species Diversity

This refers to the variety of species. It relates to
the number of species in a deﬁned area. The
diversity of species can be measured through
its richness, abundance and types. Some areas
are more rich in species than others. Areas rich
in species diversity are called hotspots of
diversity (Figure l 6.5).

Ecosystem Diversity

You have studied about the ecosystem in the
earlier chapter. The broad differences between
ecosystem types and the diversity of habitats
and ecological processes occurring within each
ecosystem type constitute the ecosystem
diversity. The ‘boundaries’ of communities
(associations of species) and ecosystems are not
very rigidly defined. Thus, the demarcation of
ecosystem boundaries is difficult and complex.

 

 

 

Figure 16. 1 : Grasslands and sholas in Indira Gandhi
National Park, Annamalai, Western Ghats — an
example of ecosystem diversity

Importance of Biodiversity

Biodiversity has contributed in many ways to
the development of human culture and, in
turn, human communities have played a major
role in shaping the diversity of nature at the
genetic, species and ecological levels.
Biodiversity plays the following roles:
ecological, economic and scientific.

Ecological Role of Biodiversity

Species of many kinds perform some function
or the other in an ecosystem. Nothing in an

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

ecosystem evolves and sustains without any
reason. That means, every organism, besides
extracting its needs, also contributes something
of useful to other organisms. Can you think of
the way we, humans contribute to the
sustenance of ecosystems. Species capture
and store energy, produce and decompose
organic materials, help to cycle water and
nutrients throughout the ecosystem, fix
atmospheric gases and help regulate the
climate. These functions are important for
ecosystem function and human survival. The
more diverse an ecosystem, better are the
chances for the species to survive through
adversities and attacks, and consequently, is
more productive. Hence, the loss of species
would decrease the ability of the system to
maintain itself. Just like a species with a high
genetic diversity, an ecosystem with high
biodiversity may have a greater chance of
adapting to environmental change. In other
words, the more the variety of species in an
ecosystem, the more stable the ecosystem is
likely to be.

Economic Role of Biodiversity

For all humans, biodiversity is an important
resource in their day-to-day life. One important
part of biodiversity is ‘crop diversity’, which is
also called agro-biodiversity. Biodiversity is
seen as a reservoir of resources to be drawn
upon for the manufacture of food,
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic products. This
concept of biological resources is responsible
for the deterioration of biodiversity. At the same
time, it is also the origin of new conﬂicts dealing
with rules of division and appropriation of
natural resources. Some of the important
economic commodities that biodiversity
supplies to humankind are: food
crops, livestock, forests, fish, medicinal
resources, etc.

Scientiﬁc Role of Biodiversity

Biodiversity is important because each species
can give us some clue as to how life evolved
and will continue to evolve. Biodiversity also
helps in understanding how life functions and
the role of each species in sustaining

2019-2020