10

Physical geography includes the study of
lithosphere (landforms, drainage, relief and
physiography), atmosphere (its composition,
structure, elements and controls of weather
and climate; temperature, pressure, winds,
precipitation, climatic types, etc.), hydrosphere
(oceans, seas, lakes and associated features
with water realm) and biosphere ( life forms
including human being and macro-organism
and their sustaining mechanism, viz. food
chain, ecological parameters and ecological
balance). Soils are formed through the process
of pedogenesis and depend upon the parent
rocks, climate, biological activity and time.
Time provides maturity to soils and helps in
the development of soil profiles. Each element
is important for human beings. Landforms
provide the base on which human activities are
located. The plains are utilised for agriculture.
Plateaus provide forests and minerals.
Mountains provide pastures, forests, tourist
spots and are sources of rivers providing water
to lowlands. Climate inﬂuences our house
types, clothing and food habits. The climate
has a profound effect on vegetation, cropping
pattern, livestock farming and some
industries, etc. Human beings have developed
technologies which modify climatic elements
in a restricted space such as air conditioners
and coolers. Temperature and precipitation
ensure the density of forests and quality of
grassland. In India, monsoonal rainfall sets the
agriculture rhythm in motion. Precipitation
recharges the ground water aquifers which
later provides water for agriculture and
domestic use. We study oceans which are the
store house of resources. Besides ﬁsh and other

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

sea-food, oceans are rich in mineral resources.
India has developed the technology for
collecting manganese nodules from oceanic
bed. Soils are renewable resources, which
inﬂuence a number of economic activities such
as agriculture. The fertility of the soil is both
naturally determined and culturally induced.
Soils also provide the basis for the biosphere
accommodating plants, animals and micro
organisms.

What is Geography?

Geography is concerned with the description
and explanation of the areal differentiation of
the earth’s surface.

Richard H artshome

Geography studies the differences of
phenomena usually related in different parts
of the earth’s surface.

Hettner

 

 

The study of physical geography is
emerging as a discipline of evaluating and
managing natural resources. In order to
achieve this objective, it is essential to
understand the intricate relationship between
physical environment and human beings.
Physical environment provides resources, and
human beings utilise these resources and
ensure their economic and cultural
development. Accelerated pace of resource
utilisation with the help of modern technology
has created ecological imbalance inthe world.
Hence, a better understanding of physical
environment is absolutely essential for
sustainable development.

7 EXERCISES 7

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following scholars coined the term ‘Geography’?
(0) Galileo
(d) Aristotle

(a) Herodotus

(b) Erathosthenese
(ii) Which one of the following features can be termed as ‘physical feature"?

(a) Port

(b) Road

(0) Plain

(d) Water park

2019-2020