Increasing ‘Shelter’ for the urban poor. settlements. As the growth of rural population

Provision of basic urban services such as has outpaced the generation 0f employment and
‘Education’, ‘Primary Health care’, ‘Clean economic opportunities, rural-to—urban migration
Water and Sanitation’. has steadily increased, particularly in the
lmpro ving women’s access to ‘Basic developing countries, which has put an enormous
Services’and government fad/[ﬂea pressure on urban infrastructure and serv1ces

that are already under serious stress. It is urgent
to eradicate rural poverty and to improve the
quality of living conditions, as well as to create
employment and educational opportunities in
rural settlements. Full advantage must be taken

Cities, towns and rural settlements are linked 0f the complementaiy COhtI‘ibUtiC’hS and linkages

through the movements of goods, resources and 0f rural and urban areas by balancing their
people. Urban-rural linkages are of crucial different economic, social and environmental

importance for the sustainability of human requirements.

Upgrading ‘Energy’ use and alternative
‘Transport’systems.

Reducing ‘Air Pollution’.

 

1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.

(i) Which one of the following forms of settlement develops along either side of
roads, rivers or canals?
(a) circular (c) cross-shaped
(b) linear ((1) square

(ii) Which one of the following types of economic activities dominates in all rural
settlement?
(a) primary (c) secondary
(b) tertiary (d) quaternary

(iii) In which of the following regions has the oldest well-documented urban
settlement found?
(a) Huang He Valley (0) Nile Valley
(b) Indus Valley (d) Mesopotamia

(iv) How many of the following cities in India have attained the million status at the
beginning of 2006?
(a) 4O (c) 41
(b) 42 (d) 43

(v) Sufficiency of which type of resources can help to create adequate social
infrastructure catering to the needs of the large population in the developing
countries?
(a) financial (0) natural
(b) human (d) social

 

_ Ho: titan Mitiriiwrs

 

2019—20