88

climate. A schematic description of the general
circulation is shown in Figure 10.6.

Polar
Vortex

N.P \ Polar

_\ Cell/

   
       
   

fl 0 Polar

\Jet Stream
Ferrel
cell\.Subtropica1
‘_\ J et Stream

    
 
      
   
 
   
    

.. Westerlies \

.—> 30°N- H—

 

   

 

 

—/H
/ / North East Trades / £15916},
—>
—ITCZ Equator —>
\ \o '\ South East Tradevx\ ]
—>30°S-H \SI‘H \H *"

Westerlies

            

Polar Easterlies
A‘//V\ H
\ TS‘PT

Figure 10. 6 : Simpliﬁed general circulation
of the atmosphere

The air at the Inter Tropical Convergence
Zone (ITCZ) rises because of convection caused
by high insolation and a low pressure is
created. The winds from the tropics converge
at this low pressure zone. The converged air
rises along with the convective cell. It reaches
the top of the troposphere up to an altitude of
14 km. and moves towards the poles. This
causes accumulation of air at about 30° N and
S. Part of the accumulated air sinks to the
ground and forms a subtropical high. Another
reason for sinking is the cooling of air when it
reaches 30° N and S latitudes. Down below
near the land surface the air ﬂows towards the
equator as the easterlies. The easterlies from
either side of the equator converge in the Inter
Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). Such
circulations from the surface upwards and
vice-versa are called cells. Such a cell in the
tropics is called Hadley Cell. In the middle
latitudes the circulation is that of sinking cold
air that comes from the poles and the rising
warm air that blows from the subtropical high.
At the surface these winds are called westerlies
and the cell is known as the Ferrel cell At polar
latitudes the cold dense air subsides near the
poles and blows towards middle latitudes as
the polar easterlies. This cell is called the polar
cell. These three cells set the pattern for the
general circulation of the atmosphere. The
transfer of heat energy from lower latitudes to
higher latitudes maintains the general
circulation.

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

The general circulation of the atmosphere
also affects the oceans. The large-scale winds
of the atmosphere initiate large and slow
moving currents of the ocean. Oceans in turn
provide input of energy and water vapour into
the air. These interactions take place rather
slowly over a large part of the ocean.

General Atmospheric Circulation and
its Effects on Oceans

Warming and cooling of the Pacific Ocean
is most important in terms of general
atmospheric circulation. The warm water
of the central Pacific Ocean slowly drifts
towards South American coast and
replaces the cool Peruvian current. Such
appearance of warm water off the coast
of Peru is known as the El Nino. The El
Nino event is closely associated with the
pressure changes in the Central Pacific
and Australia. This change in pressure
condition over Pacific is known as the
southern oscillation. The combined
phenomenon of southern oscillation and
El Nino is known as ENSO. In the years
when the ENSO is strong, large-scale
variations in weather occur over the
world. The arid west coast of South
America receives heavy rainfall, drought
occurs in Australia and sometimes in
India and ﬂoods in China. This
phenomenon is closely monitored and is
used for long range forecasting in major
parts of the world.

 

 

 

Seasonal Wind

The pattern of wind circulation is modified in
different seasons due to the shifting of regions
of maximum heating, pressure and wind belts.
The most pronounced effect of such a shift is
noticed in the monsoons, especially over
southeast Asia. You would be studying the
details of monsoon in the book India: Physical
Environment (NCERT, 2006). The other local
deviations from the general circulation system
are as follows.

Local Winds

Differences in the heating and cooling of earth
surfaces and the cycles those develop daily or
annually can create several common, local or
regional winds.

2019-2020