Issue and Redemption of Debentures 1 09

SECTION II

2. 1 l Redemption of Debentures

Redemption of debentures refers to extinguishing or discharging the liability on
account of debentures in accordance with the terms of issue. In other words
redemption of debentures means repayment of the amount of debentures by
the company. There are four ways by which the debentures can be redeemed.
These are :

1. Payment in lump sum

2 Payment in instalments

3. Purchase in the open market
4

By conversion into shares or new debentures.

Methods of Redemption of Debentures

 
 
   

   

         

Payment in Payment in Purchase in Conversion into Shares
Lump sum Instalments Open Market or New Debentures

Payment in lump sum : The company redeems the debentures by paying the
amount in lump sum to the debentureholders at the maturity thereof as per
terms of issue.

Payment in instalments : Under this method, normally redemption of debentures
is made in instalments on the speciﬁed date during the tenure of the debentures.
The total amount of debenture liability is divided by the number of years. It is to
note that the actual debentures redeemable are identiﬁed by means of drawing
the requisite number of lots out of the debentures outstanding for payment.

Purchase in open market: When a company purchases its own debentures for
the purposes of cancellation, such an act of purchasing and cancelling the
debentures constitutes redemption of debentures by purchase in the open
market.

Conversion into shares or new debentures : A company can redeem its
debentures by converting them into shares or new class of debentures. If
debentureholders ﬁnd that the offer is beneﬁcial to them, they can exercise their
right of converting their debentures into shares or new class of debentures. These
new shares or debentures can be issued at par, at a discount or at a premium.
It should be noted that only the actual proceeds of debentures are to be taken
into account for ascertaining the number of shares to be issued in lieu of the