Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 189

6.4. Signiﬁcance of Agreement of Trial Balance

It is important for an accountant that the trial balance should tally. Normally a tallied
trial balance means that both the debit and the credit entries have been made correctly
for each transaction. However, as stated earlier, the agreement of trial balance is not
an absolute proof of accuracy of accounting records. A tallied trial balance only proves,
to a certain extent, that the posting to the ledger is arithmetically correct. But it does
not guarantee that the entry itself is correct. There can be errors, which affect the
equality of debits and credits, and there can be errors, which do not affect the equality
of debits and credits. Some common errors include the following:

0 Error in totalling of the debit and credit balances in the trial balance.

0 Error in totalling of subsidiary books.

0 Error in posting of the total of subsidiary books.

0 Error in showing account balances in wrong column of the tiral balance, or
in the wrong amount.

0 Omission in showing an account balance in the trial balance.

0 Error in the calculation of a ledger account balance.

0 Error while posting a journal entry: a j ournal entry may not have been posted
properly to the ledger, i.e., posting made either with wrong amount or on the
wrong side of the account or in the wrong account.

0 Error in recording a transaction in the journal: making a reverse entry, i.e.,
account to be debited is credited and amount to be credited is debited, or an
entry with wrong amount.

0 Error in recording a transaction in subsidiary book with wrong name or wrong
amount.

6.4.1 Classiﬁcation of Errors

Keeping in view the nature of errors, all the errors can be classified into the
following four categories:

0 Errors of Commission

0 Errors of Omission

0 Errors of Principle

° Compensating Errors

6.4.2 Errors of Commission

These are the errors which are committed due to wrong posting of transactions,
wrong totalling or wrong balancing of the accounts, wrong casting of the
subsidiary books, or wrong recording of amount in the books of original entry,
etc. For example: Raj Hans Traders paid ? 25,000 to Preetpal Traders (a supplier
of goods). This transaction was correctly recorded in the cashbook.

2019-2020