1 2 Accountancy : Company Accounts andAnalysis of Financial Statements

Another point to be noted is that the words ‘and Final' will also be added to the
last call, say, if second call is the last call it will be termed as ‘Second and Final
Call' and if it is the third call which is the last call. it will be termed as ‘Third and
Final Call'. It is also possible that the whole balance after allotment may be
collected in one call only. In that case the ﬁrst call itself, shall be termed as the
‘First and Final Call'.

The following points should be kept in mind while issuing the share capital for
public subscription :

1. The application money should be at least 5% of the face value of the share.
2. Calls are to be made as per the provisions of the articles of association.

3. Where there is no articles of association of its own. the following provisions
of Table A will apply:

(a) A period of one month must elapse between two calls;

(b) The amount of call should not exceed 25% of the face value of the share;

(0) A minimum of 14 days' notice is given to the shareholders to pay the
amount: and

(d) Calls must be made on a uniform basis on all shares within the same
class.

4. The procedure for accounting for the issue of both equity and preference shares
is the same. To differentiate between the two the words ‘Equity’ and ‘Preference’
is preﬁxed to each and every instalment.

 

Illustration 1

Mona Earth Mover Limited decided to issue 12,000 shares of Rs. 100 each
payable at Rs.30 on application, Rs.40 on allotment. Rs.20 on ﬁrst call and
balance on second and ﬁnal call. Applications were received for 13,000 shares.
The directors decided to reject application of 1,000 shares and their application
money being refunded in full. The allotment money was duly received on all the
shares, and all sums due on calls are received except on 100 shares.

Record the transactions in the books of Mona Earth Movers Limited

Solution
Books of Mona Earth Mover Limited
Journal

Date Particulars Credit
Amount Amount

Bank A/c 3.90.000
To Share Application A/c 3.90.000
(Application money on 13.000 shares @ Rs.30

per share received)

Share Application A/c Dr. 3.60.000
To Share Capital A/c 3.60.000
(Application money transferred to share capital)