246 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

6. 6. 2 Indirect Method

Indirect method of ascertaining cash ﬂow from operating activities begins with
the amount of net proﬁt/ loss. This is so because statement of proﬁt and loss
incorporates the effects of all operating activities of an enterprise. However,
Statement of Proﬁt and Loss is prepared on accrual basis (and not on cash
basis). Moreover, it also includes certain non-operating items such as interest
paid, profit/ loss on sale of fixed assets, etc.) and non-cash items (such as
depreciation, goodwill to be written-off, etc.. Therefore, it becomes necessary to
adjust the amount of net proﬁt/ loss as shown by Statement of Proﬁt and Loss
for arriving at cash ﬂows from operating activities. Let us look at the example :

Statement of Proﬁt and Loss Account
for the ear ended March 31, 2017

i) Revenue from Operations 1,00,000
ii) Other Income 2,000
iii) Total Revenues (i+ii)
iv) Expenses

Cost of Materials Consumed

Purchases of stock-in-trade

Employees Beneﬁts Expenses

Finance Costs

Depreciation

Other Expenses

 

Proﬁt before Tax [iii-iv)

Note: Other income includes proﬁt on sale of land.

The above Statement of Proﬁt and Loss shows the amount of net proﬁt of Rs
30,000. This has to be adjusted for arriving cash ﬂows from operating activities.
Let us take various items one by one.

1. Depreciation is a non-cash item and hence, Rs 5,000 charged as
depreciation does not result in any cash ﬂow. Therefore, this amount
must be added back to the net proﬁt.

2. Finance costs of Rs 5,000 is a cash outﬂow on account of ﬁnancing
activity. Therefore, this amount must also be added back to net proﬁt
while calculating cash ﬂows from operating activities. This amount of
ﬁnance cost will be shown as an outflow under the head of ﬁnancing
activities.

3. Other income includes proﬁt on sale of land: It is cash inﬂow from
investing activity. Hence, this amount must be deducted from the
amount of net profit while calculating cash ﬂows from operating
activities.