Financial Statements of a Company 1 4 1

amount paid for them. While, preparing statement of proﬁt and loss
the revenue is included in the sales of the year in which the sale was
undertaken even though the sale price may be received over a number
of years. The assumption is known as realisation postulate.

Personal Judgements: Under more than one circumstance, facts and
ﬁgures presented through ﬁnancial statements are based on personal
opinion, estimates and judgements. The depreciation is provided taking
into consideration the useful economic life of fixed assets. Provisions
for doubtful debts are made on estimates and personal judgements.
In valuing inventory, cost or market value, whichever is less is being
followed. While deciding either cost of inventory or market value of
inventory, many personal judgements are to be made based on certain
considerations. Personal opinion, judgements and estimates are made
while preparing the ﬁnancial statements to avoid any possibility of
over statement of assets and liabilities, income and expenditure,
keeping in mind the convention of conservatism.

Thus, ﬁnancial statements are the summarised reports of recorded facts and
are prepared the following accounting concepts, conventions and requirements

of Law.

3.3 Objectives of Financial Statements

Financial statements are the basic sources of information to the shareholders
and other external parties for understanding the proﬁtability and ﬁnancial
position of any business concern. They provide information about the results of
the business concern during a speciﬁed period of time in terms of assets and
liabilities, which provide the basis for taking decisions. Thus, the primary
objective of ﬁnancial statements is to assist the users in their decision-making.
The speciﬁc objectives include the following:

1.

To provide information about economic resources and obligations of
a business: They are prepared to provide adequate, reliable and
periodical information about economic resources and obligations of a
business ﬁrm to investors and other external parties who have limited
authority, ability or resources to obtain information.

To provide information about the earning capacity of the business:
They are to provide useful financial information which can gainfuﬂy
be utilised to predict, compare and evaluate the business ﬁrm’s earning
capacity.

To provide information about cash ﬂows: They are to provide
information useful to investors and creditors for predicting, comparing
and evaluating, potential cash ﬂows in terms of amount, timing and
related uncertainties.