Cash Flow Statement 241

6.5.4 Treatment of Some Peculiar Items
Extraordinary items

Extraordinary items are not the regular phenomenon, e. g., loss due to theft or
earthquake or ﬂood. Extraordinary items are non-recurring in nature and hence
cash ﬂows associated with extraordinary items should be classiﬁed and disclosed
separately as arising from operating, investing or ﬁnancing activities. This is
done to enable users to understand their nature and effect on the present and
future cash ﬂows of an enterprise.

Interest and Dividend

In case of a ﬁnancial enterprise (whose main business is lending and borrowing),
interest paid, interest received and dividend received are classiﬁed as operating
activities while dividend paid is a ﬁnancing activity.

In case of a non-ﬁnancial enterprise, as per AS—3, it is considered more
appropriate that payment of interest and dividends are classified as ﬁnancing
activities whereas receipt of interest and dividends are classiﬁed as investing
activities.

Taxes on Income and Gains

Taxes may be income tax (tax on normal proﬁt), capital gains tax (tax on capital
proﬁts), dividend tax (tax on the amount distributed as dividend to shareholders).
AS—3 requires that cash ﬂows arising from taxes on income should be separately
disclosed and should be classiﬁed as cash ﬂows from operating activities unless
they can be speciﬁcally identified with ﬁnancing and investing activities. This
clearly implies that:
0 tax on operating proﬁt should be classiﬁed as operating cash ﬂows.
0 dividend tax, i.e., tax paid on dividend should be classiﬁed as ﬁnancing
activity along with dividend paid.
0 Capital gains tax paid on sale of ﬁxed assets should be classiﬁed under
investing activities.

Non-cash Transactions

As per AS—3, investing and ﬁnancing transactions that do not require the use of
cash or cash equivalents should be excluded from a cash ﬂow statement.
Examples of such transactions are — acquisition of machinery by issue of equity
shares or redemption of debentures by issue of equity shares. Such transactions
should be disclosed elsewhere in the ﬁnancial statements in a way that provide
all the relevant information about these investing and ﬁnancing activities. Hence,
assets acquired by issue of shares are not disclosed in cash ﬂow statement due
to non-cash nature of the transaction.