Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 199

The trial balance when prepared on the basis of above balances will not
tally. Its credit column total will amount to f 50,000 and debit column total to

f 35,000. The trial balance would differ with ? 15,000. This difference will be

temporarily put to suspense account and trial balance will be made to agree in
the ledger.

In the above case, difference in trial balance has arisen due to one sided
error (omission of posting to Diwakar and sons’s account). In a real situation,
there can be many other such one-sided errors which cause a difference in
trial balance and thus result in opening of the suspense account. Till the all
errors affecting agreement of trial balance are not located it is not possible to
rectify them and tally the trial balance in such a situation, is shown in the
Suspense account, make the total of debit and credit columns and proceed
further with the accounting process.

When the errors are located and the specific accounts and amounts involved
are identified, the amounts are transferred from suspense account to the
relevant accounts thereby closing the suspense account. Thus, suspense
account is not placed in any particular category of accounts and is just a
temporary phenomenon.

While rectifying one-sided errors using suspense account, the following steps
are taken:

(i) Identify the account affected due to error.

(ii) Ascertain the amount of excess debit / credit or short debit / credit in the
affected account.

(iii) If the error has resulted in excess debit or short credit in the affected
account, credit the account with the amount of excess debit or short
credit.

(iv) If the error has resulted in excess credit or short debit in the affected

account, debit the account with the amount of excess credit or short
debit.

(v) Complete the journal entry by debiting or crediting the suspense account
as another account affected otherwise.

We will now discuss the process of rectiﬁcation using suspense account:

(a) Credit sales to Mohan 3 10,000 were not posted to his account. This is an
error of partial omission comitted while posting entries of the sales book.
Wrong effect has been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. Nil
To Sales A/c 10,000

2019-2020