Financial Statements of a Company 1 61

PIPFDPE"

the liquidation is forced on the company. Assets shown in the balance
sheet reﬂect merely unexpired or unamortised cost.

Bias: Financial statements are the outcome of recorded facts, accounting
concepts and conventions used and personal judgements made in
different situations by the accountants. Hence, bias may be observed
in the results, and the ﬁnancial position depicted in ﬁnancial statements
may not be realistic.

Aggregate information: Financial statements show aggregate
information but not detailed information. Hence, they may not help
the users in decision—making much.

Vital information missing: Balance sheet does not disclose information
relating to loss of markets, and cessation of agreements, which have
Vital bearing on the enterprise.

No qualitative information: Financial statements contain only
monetary information but not qualitative information like industrial
relations, industrial climate, labour relations, quality of work, etc.

They are only interim reports: Statement of Proﬁt and Loss discloses
the proﬁt/ loss for a speciﬁed period. It does not give an idea about the
earning capacity over time similarly, the ﬁnancial position reﬂected in
the balance sheet is true at that point of time, the likely change on a
future date is not depicted.

Terms Introduced in the Chapter

Financial Statements
Statement of proﬁt and loss
Balance Sheet

Cost of Material consumed
Shareholders Funds

Summary

Financial Statements: Financial statements are the end products of accounting
process, which reveal the ﬁnancial results of a speciﬁed period and ﬁnancial position
as on a particular date. Financial Statements are prepared and published by
corporate undertakings for the beneﬁt of various stakeholders. These statements
include Statement of profit and loss and balance sheet. The basic objective of
these statements is to provide information required for decision-making by the
management as well as other outsiders who are interested in the affairs of the
undertaking.