4

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

1 .3.1 Categories of Share Capital

From accounting point of View the share capital of the company can be classified
as follows:

Authorised Capital: Authorised capital is the amount of share capital
which a company is authorised to issue by its Memorandum of
Association. The company cannot raise more than the amount of capital
as speciﬁed in the Memorandum of Association. It is also called Nominal
or Registered capital. The authorised capital can be increased or
decreased as per the procedure laid down in the Companies Act. It should
be noted that the company need not issue the entire authorised capital
for public subscription at a time. Depending upon its requirement, it
may issue share capital but in any case, it should not be more than the
amount of authorised capital.

Issued Capital: It is that part of the authorised capital which is actually
issued to the public for subscription including the shares allotted to
vendors and the signatories to the company's memorandum. The
authorised capital which is not offered for public subscription is known
as ‘unissued capital'. Unissued capital may be offered for public
subscription at a later date.

Subscribed Capital: It is that part of the issued capital which has been actually
subscribed by the public. When the shares offered for public subscription
are subscribed fully by the public the issued capital and subscribed capital
would be the same. It may be noted that ultimately, the subscribed capital
and issued capital are the same because if the number of share, subscribed
is less than what is offered, the company allot only the number of shares for
which subscription has been received. In case it is higher than what is offered,
the allotment will be equal to the offer. In other words, the fact of over
subscription is not reﬂected in the books.

Called up Capital: It is that part of the subscribed capital which has
been called up on the shares. The company may decide to call the entire
amount or part of the face value of the shares. For example, if the face
value (also called nominal value) of a share allotted is Rs. 10 and the
company has called up only Rs. 7 per share, in that scenario, the called
up capital is Rs. 7 per share. The remaining Rs. 3 may be collected from
its shareholders as and when needed.

Paid up Capital: It is that portion of the called up capital which has been
actually received from the shareholders. When the shareholders have
paid all the call amount, the called up capital is the same to the paid up
capital. If any of the shareholders has not paid amount on calls, such an
amount may be called as ‘calls in arrears'. Therefore, paid up capital is
equal to the called-up capital minus call in arrears.

Uncalled Capital: That portion of the subscribed capital which has not
yet been called up. As stated earlier, the company may collect this amount

any time when it needs further funds.