Cash Flow Statement 243

As per AS-3, an enterprise should report cash ﬂows from operating activities
either by using :
0 Direct method whereby major classes of gross cash receipts and gross
cash payments are disclosed;
or
0 Indirect method whereby net proﬁt or loss is duly adjusted for the effects
of (1) transactions of a non—cash nature, (2) any deferrals or accruals of
past / future operating cash receipts, and (3) items of income or expenses
associated with investing or financing cash ﬂows. It is important to
mention here that under indirect method, the starting point is net proﬁt /
loss before taxation and extra ordinary items as per Statement of Proﬁt
and Loss of the enterprise. Then this amount is for non-cash items,
etc., adjusted for ascertaining cash ﬂows from operating activities.
Accordingly, cash ﬂow from operating activities can be determined using
either the Direct method or the Indirect method. These methods are discussed
in detail as follows.

6. 6. 1 Direct Method

As the name suggests, under direct method, major heads of cash inﬂows and
outﬂows (such as cash received from trade receivables, employee benefits
expenses paid, etc.) are considered.

It is important to note here that items are recorded on accrual basis in
statement of profit and loss. Hence, certain adjustments are made to convert
them into cash basis such as the following :

1. Cash receipts from customers = Revenue from operations + Trade
receivables in the beginning — Trade receivables in the end.

2. Cash payments to suppliers = Purchases + Trade Payables in the
beginning — Trade Payables in the end.

3. Purchases = Cost of Revenue from Operations — Opening Inventory +
Closing Inventory.

4. Cash expenses = Expenses on accrual basis + Prepaid expenses in the
beginning and Outstanding expenses in the end — Prepaid expenses in
the end and Outstanding expenses in the beginning.

However, the following items are not to be considered:

1. Non—cash items such as depreciation , discount on shares, etc., be written-
off.
2. Items which are classiﬁed as investing or ﬁnancing activities such as
interest received, dividend paid, etc.
As per AS—S, under the direct method, information about major classes of
gross cash receipts and cash payments may be obtained either—