6 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

1.4 Nature and Classes of Shares

Shares, refer to the units into which the total share capital of a company is
divided. Thus, a share is a fractional part of the share capital and forms the
basis of ownership interest in a company. The persons who contribute money
through shares are called shareholders.

The amount of authorised capital, together with the number of shares in
which it is divided, is stated in the Memorandum of Association but the classes
of shares in which the company's capital is to be divided, along with their
respective rights and obligations, are prescribed by the Articles of Association
of the company. As per The Companies Act, a company can issue two types
of shares (1) preference shares, and (2) equity shares (also called ordinary
shares).

1 .4. 1 Preference Shares

According to Section 43 of The Companies Act, 20 13, a preference share is one,
which fulﬁls the following conditions :

(a) That it carries a preferential right to dividend to be paid either as a
fixed amount payable to preference shareholders or an amount
calculated by a ﬁxed rate of the nominal value of each share before
any dividend is paid to the equity shareholders.

(b) That with respect to capital it carries or will carry, on the winding up
of the company, the preferential right to the repayment of capital before
anything is paid to equity shareholders.

However, notwithstanding the above two conditions, a holder of the
preference share may have a right to participate fully or to a limited extent in
the surpluses of the company as specified in the Memorandum or Articles of
the company. Thus, the preference shares can be participating and non-
participating. Similarly, these shares can be cumulative or non—cumulative, and
redeemable or irredeemable.

1 .4.2 Equity Shares

According to Section 43 of The Companies Act, 20 13, an equity share is a share
which is not a preference share. In other words, shares which do not enjoy any
preferential right in the payment of dividend or repayment of capital, are termed
as equity/ ordinary shares. The equity shareholders are entitled to share the
distributable proﬁts of the company after satisfying the dividend rights of the
preference share holders. The dividend on equity shares is not ﬁxed and it may