Accounting for Share Capital 3 5

1.7 Forfeiture of Shares

It may happen that some shareholders fail to pay one or more instalments,
viz. allotment money and / or call money. In such circumstances, the company
can forfeit their shares, i.e. cancel their allotment and treat the amount already
received thereon as forfeited to the company within the framework of the
provisions in its articles. These provisions are usually based on Table F
which authorise the directors to forefeit the shares for non—payment of calls
made. For this purpose, they have to strictly follow the procedure laid down
in this regard. Following is the accounting treatment of shares issued at par,
premium or at a discount. When shares are forefeited all entries relating to
the shares forfeited except those relating to premium, already recorded in
the accounting records must be reversed. Accordingly, share capital account
is debited with the amount called-up in respect of shares are forfeited and
crediting the respective unpaid calls accounts’s or calls in arrears account
with the amount already received. Thus, the journal entry will be as follows:

(a) Forfeiture of Shares issued at Par:
Share Capital A/c .......... (Called up amount) Dr.
To Share Forfeiture A/c ........... (Paid up amount)
To Share Allotment A/c
To Share Calls A/c (individually)
( ..... shares forfeited for non-payment of
allotment money and calls made)

It may be noted here that when the shares are forfeited. all entries relating to the
forfeited shares must be reversed except the entry relating to share premium received. if
any. Accordingly, the share capital is debited to the extent to called-up capital and credited
to (i) respective unpaid calls account i.e., calls in arrears and (ii) share forfeiture account
with the amount already received on shares.

The balance of shares forfeited account is shown as an addition to the total
paid-up capital of the company under the head ‘Share Capital’ under title
‘Equity and Liabilities’ of the Balance Sheet till the forfeited shares are reissued.

Illustration 10

Honda Limited issued 10,000 equity shares of 100 each payable as follows:
Rs. 20 on application, Rs. 30 on allotment, Rs. 20 on ﬁrst call and Rs. 30 on
second and ﬁnal calls 10,000 shares were applied for and allotted. All money
due was received with the exception of both calls on 300 shares held by Supriya.
These shares were forfeited. Give necessary journal entries.