Financial Statements of a Company 1 45

Share Capital
Disclosures relating to share capital are to be given in notes to accounts. The
following additions / modiﬁcations are signiﬁcant:

a) For each class of shares, recognition of the number of shares outstanding
at the beginning and at the end of the reporting period is required.

b) The rights, preferences and restrictions attached to each class of shares
including restrictions on the distribution of dividends and repayment of
capital.

c) In order to bring clarity regarding the identity of ultimate owners of the
company:

1) Disclosure of shares in respect of each class in the company held
by its holding company or its ultimate holding company including
shares held by subsidiaries or associates of holding company or
the ultimate holding company in aggregate.

ii) Disclosure of shares in the company held by each shareholder
holding more than 5% shares specifying the number of shares held.

iii) Disclosure of the following for the period of 5 years immediately
preceding the date of the balance sheet:

0 Aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up
pursuant to contracts without payment being received in cash.

0 Aggregate number and class of shares allotted as fully paid up
by way of bonus shares.

0 Aggregate number and class of shares bought back.

This may be noted that the information of shareholders funds are presented
on the face of ﬁnancial statements limited only to broad and signiﬁcant items. Details
are given in Notes to Accounts.

(1) For each class of share capital:

1) The number and amount of share authorised.

ii) The number of shares issued, subscibed, fully paid and subscribed
but not fully paid.

iii) Par value per share.

iv) Reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning
and end of the accounting period.

v) Rights, preferences and restrictions attaching each class of shares
including restrictions on the distribution of dividends and
repayment of capital.

vi) Aggregate number of shares with respect to each class in the
company held by its holding company, its ultimate holding
company including shares held by or by subsidiaries or associates
of the holding company or the ultimate holding company.