192 Accountancy

6.6 Rectiﬁcation of Errors

From the point of view of rectiﬁcation, the errors may be classiﬁed into the
following two categories:

(a) errors which do not affect the trial balance.

(b) errors which affect the trial balance.
This distinction is relevant because the errors which do not affect the trial
balance usually take place in two accounts in such a manner that it can be
easily rectified through a journal entry whereas the errors which affect the
trial balance usually affect one account and a journal entry is not possible for
rectiﬁcation unless a suspense account has been opened. Such errors are rectiﬁed

by passing a nullifying entry in the respective account as explained before under
6.6.2.

6.6.1 Rectification of Errors which do not Affect the Trial Balance

These errors are committed in two or more accounts. Such errors are also known
as two sided errors. They can be rectified by recording a j ournal entry giving the
correct debit and credit to the concerned accounts.

Examples of such errors are — complete omission to record an entry in the
books of original entry; wrong recording of transactions in the book of accounts;
complete omission of posting to the wrong account on the correct side, and
errors of principle.

The rectiﬁcation process essentially involves:
° Cancelling the effect of wrong debit or credit by reversing it; and
0 Restoring the effect of correct debit or credit.

For this purpose, we need to analyse the error in terms of its effect on the

accounts involved which may be:

(i) Short debit or credit in an account; and / or
(ii) Excess debit or credit in an account.

Therefore, rectification entry can be done by:
(i) debiting the account with short debit or with excess credit,
(ii) crediting the account with excess debit or with short credit.
The procedure for rectiﬁcation for such errors is explained with the help of
following examples:

(a) Credit sales to Mohan ? 10,000 were not recorded in the sales book. This is an error
of complete omission. Its affect is that Mohan’s account has not been debited and
Sales account has not been credited. Accordingly, recording usual entry for credit
sales will rectify the error.

2019-2020