74

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

2.3.1 From the Point of view of Security

(a)

(b)

Secured Debentures: Secured debentures refer to those debentures
where a charge is created on the assets of the company for the purpose
of payment in case of default. The charge may be ﬁxed or ﬂoating. A
ﬁxed charge is created on a speciﬁc asset whereas a ﬂoating charge is
on the general assets of the company. The ﬁxed charge is created
against those assets which are held by a company for use in operations
not meant for sale whereas ﬂoating charge involves all assets excluding
those assigned to the secured creditors.

Unsecured Debentures: Unsecured debentures do not have a speciﬁc
charge on the assets of the company. However, a ﬂoating charge may
be created on these debentures by default. Normally, these kinds of
debentures are not issued.

2.3.2 From the Point of view of Tenure

(a)

(b)

Redeemable Debentures: Redeemable debentures are those which are
payable on the expiry of the speciﬁc period either in lump sum or in
Instalments during the life time of the company. Debentures can be
redeemed either at par or at premium.

Irredeemable Debentures: Irredeemable debentures are also known
as Perpetual Debentures because the company does not give any
undertaking for the repayment of money borrowed by issuing such
debentures. These debentures are repayable on the winding-up of a
company or on the expiry of a long period.

2.3.3 From the Point of view of Convertibility

(a)

(1?)

Convertible Debentures: Debentures which are convertible into equity
shares or in any other security either at the option of the company or
the debentureholders are called convertible debentures. These
debentures are either fully convertible or partly convertible.
Non-Convertible Debentures: The debentures which cannot be
converted into shares or in any other securities are called non-
convertible debentures. Most debentures issued by companies fall in
this category.

2.3.4 From Coupon Rate Point of view

(a)

Specific Coupon Rate Debentures: These debentures are issued with
a speciﬁed rate of interest, which is called the coupon rate. The speciﬁed
rate may either be ﬁxed or ﬂoating. The ﬂoating interest rate is usually
tagged with the bank rate.