236 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

equivalents of an enterprise by classifying cash ﬂows into operating, investing
and ﬁnancing activities. It requires that an enterprise should prepare a cash
ﬂow statement and should present it for each accounting period for which ﬁnancial
statements are presented. This chapter discusses this technique and explains
the method of preparing a cash ﬂow statement for an accounting period.

6.1 Objectives of Cash Flow Statement

A Cash ﬂow statement shows inﬂow and outﬂow of cash and cash equivalents from
various activities of a company during a speciﬁc period. The primary objective of
cash ﬂow statement is to provide useful information about cash ﬂows (inﬂows and
outﬂows) of an enterprise during a particular period under various heads,
i.e., operating activities, investing activities and ﬁnancing activities.

This information is useful in providing users of ﬁnancial statements with a
basis to assess the ability of the enterprise to generate cash and cash equivalents
and the needs of the enterprise to utilise those cash ﬂows. The economic decisions
that are taken by users require an evaluation of the ability of an enterprise to
generate cash and cash equivalents and the timing and certainty of their
generation.

6.2 Beneﬁts of Cash Flow Statement

Cash ﬂow statement provides the following beneﬁts :

o A cash ﬂow statement when used along with other ﬁnancial statements
provides information that enables users to evaluate changes in net assets
of an enterprise, its financial structure (including its liquidity and
solvency) and its ability to affect the amounts and timings of cash ﬂows
in order to adapt to changing circumstances and opportunities.

0 Cash ﬂow information is useful in assessing the ability of the enterprise
to generate cash and cash equivalents and enables users to develop
models to assess and compare the present value of the future cash
ﬂows of different enterprises.

o It also enhances the comparability of the reporting of operating
performance by different enterprises because it eliminates the effects of
using different accounting treatments for the same transactions and
events.

0 It also helps in balancing its cash inﬂow and cash outﬂow, keeping in
response to changing condition. It is also helpful in checking the
accuracy of past assessments of future cash ﬂows and in examining
the relationship between proﬁtability and net cash ﬂow and impact of
changing prices.