Issue and Redemption of Debentures 1 1 3

iv.

public issue as per present SEBI (Issue and Listing of Debt
Securities) Regulations, 2008, and no DRR is required in the case
of privately placed debentures.

For other companies including manufacturing and infrastructure
companies, the adequacy of DRR will be 25% of the value of
outstanding debentures issued through public issue as per
present SEBI (Issue and Listing of Debt Securities) Regulations,
2008.

25% DRR is required in the case of privately placed debentures
by listed companies. For unlisted companies issuing debentures
on private placement basis, the DR will be 25% of the value of
outstanding debentures.

(c) Every company required to create Debenture Redemption Reserve shall
on or before the 30th day of April in each year, invest or deposit, as the
case may be, a sum which shall not be less than ﬁfteen per cent, of the
amount of its debentures maturing during the year ending on the 3 1*”t
day of March of the next year, in any one or more of the following
methods, namely :-

1.

iv.

V.

Deposits with any scheduled bank, free from any charge or lien;
Securities of the Central Government or of any State Government;
Securities mentioned in sub—clauses (a) to (d) and (ee) of section
20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;

Bonds issued by any other company which is notiﬁed under sub-
clause (f) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;

The amount invested or deposited as above shall not be used for
any purpose other than for redemption of debentures maturing
during the year referred above:

((1) In case of partly convertible debentures, Debenture Redemption
Reserve shall be created in respect of non—convertible portion of
debenture issue.

(e) The amount credited to the Debenture Redemption Reserve shall not
be utilised by the company except for the purpose of redemption of
debentures.

Illustration 20

XYZ Ltd. issued 200, 15% debentures of Rs 100 each on April 01, 2013 at
discount of 10% redeemable at premium of 10% out of profits. Give journal
entries at the time of issue and redemption of debentures if debentures are
to be redeemed in lump sum at the end of 4th year. The directors decided to
transfer the minimum amount to Debenture Redemption Reserve on March

31, 2016.