8 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

company would make an application along with the application money
and deposit the same with a scheduled bank as specified in the
prospectus. The company has to get minimum subscription within 120
days from the date of the issue of the prospectus. If the company fails to
receive the same within the said period, the company cannot proceed for
the allotment of shares and application money should be returned within
130 days of the date of issue of prospectus.

° Allotment of Shares: If minimum subscription has been received, the
company may proceed for the allotment of shares after fulﬁlling certain
other legal formalities. Letters of allotment are sent to those whom the
shares have been alloted, and letters of regret to those to whom no
allotment has been made. When allotment is made, it results in a valid
contract between the company and the applicants who now became the
shareholders of the company.

Minimum Subscription

The minimum amount that, in the opinion of directors, must be raised to meet the
needs of business operations of the company relating to:

the price of any property purchased, or to be purchased, which has to be met
wholly or partly out of the proceeds of issue;

preliminary expenses payable by the company and any commission payable
in connection with the issue of shares;

the repayment of any money borrowed by the company for the above two
matters;

working capital; and
any other expenditure required for the usual conduct of business operations.

It is to be noted that ‘minimum subscription' of capital cannot be less than 90%
of the issued amount according to SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection)
Guidelines, 2000 [6.3.8.1 and 6.3.8.2]. Ifthis condition is not satisﬁed, the company
shall forthwith refund the entire subscription amount received. If a delay occurs
beyond 8 days from the date of closure of subscription list, the company shall be

liable to pay the amount with interest at the rate of 15% [Section 73(2)].

 

Shares of a company are issued either at par or at a premium. Shares are to
be issued at par when their issue price is exactly equal to their nominal value
according to the terms and conditions of issue. When the shares of a company

are issued more than its nominal value (face value), the excess amount is called
premium.