Accounting for Share Capital 7

vary from year to year depending upon the amount of proﬁts available for
distribution. The equity share capital may be (i) with voting rights; or (ii) with
differential rights as to voting, dividend or otherwise in accordance with such
rules and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

Test your Understanding — I

State which of the following statements are true :

(a) A company is an artiﬁcial person.

(b) Shareholders of a company are liable for the acts of the company.

(0) Every member of a company is entitled to take part in its management.
(d) Company's shares are generally transferable.

(e) Share application account is a personal account.

(f) The director of a company must be a shareholder.

(g) Paid up capital can exceed called up capital.

(h) Capital reserves are created from capital proﬁts.

(i) At the time of issue of shares, the maximum rate of securities
premium is 10%.

(j) The part of capital which is called up only on winding up is called
reserve capital.
The shares originally issued at discount may be re-issued at a premium.

 

1.5 Issue of Shares

A salient characteristic of the capital of a company is that the amount on its
shares can be gradually collected in easy instalments spread over a period of
time depending upon its growing ﬁnancial requirement. The ﬁrst instalment is
collected along with application and is thus, known as application money, the
second on allotment (termed as allotment money), and the remaining instalment
are termed as first call, second call and so on. The word ﬁnal is sufﬁxed to the
last instalment. However, this in no way prevents a company from calling the
full amount on shares right at the time of application.

The important steps in the procedure of share issue are :

0 Issue of Prospectus: The company ﬁrst issues the prospectus to the
public. Prospectus is an invitation to the public that a new company has
come into existence and it needs funds for doing business. It contains
complete information about the company and the manner in which the
money is to be collected from the prospective investors.

0 Receipt of Applications: When prospectus is issued to the public,
prospective investors intending to subscribe the share capital of the