Accounting for Share Capital 1 5

1.6.1 Calls in Arrears

It may happen that shareholders do not pay the call amount on due date. When
any shareholder fails to pay the amount due on allotment or on any of the calls,
such amount is known as ‘Calls in Arrears' / ‘Unpaid Calls'. Calls in Arrears
represent the debit balance of all the calls account. Such amount shall appear
as ‘Note to Accounts (Refer Chapter 3). However, where a company maintains
‘Calls in Arrears' Account, it needs to pass the following additional journal entry:
Calls in Arrears A/c Dr.
To Share First Call Account A/c
To Share Second and Final Call Account A/c

(Calls in arrears brought into account)

The Articles of Association of a company may empower the directors to charge
interest at a stipulated rate on calls in arrears. If the articles are silent in this
regard, the rule contained in Table F shall be applicable which states that the
interest at a rate not exceeding 10% pa. shall have to be paid on all unpaid
amounts on shares for the period intervening between the day ﬁxed for payment
and the time of actual payment thereof.

On receipt of the call amount together with interest, the amount of interest
shall be credited to interest account while call money shall be credited to the
respective call account or to calls in arrears account. When the shareholder
makes the payment of calls in arrears together with interest, the entry will be as
follows:

Bank A/c Dr.
To Calls in Arrears A/c
To Interest A/ 0

(Calls in arrears received with interest]
Note: If nothing is speciﬁed, there is no need to take the interest on calls in arrears

account and record the above entry

Illustration 3

Cronic Limited issued 10,000 equity shares of Rs. 10 each payable at Rs. 2.50
on application, Rs. 3 on allotment, Rs. 2 on ﬁrst call, and the balance of Rs. 2.50
on second and ﬁnal call. All the shares were fully subscribed and paid except of
a shareholder having 100 shares who could not pay for second and final call.
Give journal entries to record these transactions.