Accounting for Share Capital 6 3

cumulatively called ‘Unpaid calls’ or ‘Calls in Arrears’. However, it is not mandatory
for a company to maintain a separate Calls-in-Arrears Account. There are also
instances where some shareholders consider it discreet to pay a part or whole of
the amount not yet called-up on the shares allotted to them. Any amount paid by
a shareholder in the excess of the amount due from him on allotment/ call (calls) is
known as ‘Calls in Advance’ for which a separate account is maintained. A company
has the power to charge interest on calls in arrears and is under an obligation to
pay interest on calls-in-advance if it accepts them in accordance with the provisions
of Articles of Association.

Over Subscription: It is possible for the shares of some companies to be over
subscribed which means that applications for more shares are received than the
number offered for subscription.

If the amount of minimum subscription is not received to the extent of 90%, the
issue dissolves. In case the applications received are less than the number of
shares offered to the public, the issue is termed as ‘under subscribed’.

Issue of Shares at Premium: Irrespective of the fact that shares have been issued for
consideration other than cash, they can be issued either at par or at premium.
The issue of shares at par implies that the shares have been issued for an amount
exactly equal to their face or nominal value. In case shares are issued at a premium,
i.e. at an amount more than the nominal or par value of shares, the amount of
premium is credited to a separate account called ‘Securities Premium Reserve
Account’, the use of which is strictly regulated by law.

Issue of Shares at Discount: Shares can as well be issued at a discount, i.e. for an
amount less than the nominal or par value of shares provided the company fully
complies with the provisions laid down by law with regard to the same. Apart from
such compliance, shares of a company cannot ordinarily be issued at a discount.
According to the Companies Act, 2013, only sweat equity shares can be issued at
a discount. When shares are issued at a discount, the amount of discount is debited
to ‘Discount on Issue of Share Account’, which is in the nature of capital loss for
the company.

Forfeiture of Shares: Sometimes, shareholders fail to pay one or more instalments
on shares allotted to them. In such a case, the company has the authority to forfeit
shares of the defaulters. This is called ‘Forfeiture of Shares’. Forfeiture means the
cancellation of allotment due to breach of contract and to treat the amount already
received on such shares as forfeited to the company. The precise accounting
treatment of share forfeiture depends upon the conditions on which the shares
have been issued — at par, premium or discount. Generally speaking, accounting
treatment on forfeiture is to reverse the entries passed till the stage of forfeiture,
the amount already received on the shares being credited to Forfeiture Shares
Account.

Reissue of Shares: The management of a company is vested with the power to
reissue the shares once forfeited by it, subject of course, to the terms and conditions
in the articles of association relating to the same. The shares can be reissued even
at a discount provided the amount of discount allowed does not exceed the credit