Cash Flow Statement 237

6.3 Cash and Cash Equivalents

As stated earlier, cash ﬂow statement shows inﬂows and outﬂows of cash and
cash equivalents from various activities of an enterprise during a particular
period. As per AS-3, ‘Cash' comprises cash in hand and demand deposits with
banks, and ‘Cash equivalents' means short-term highly liquid investments that
are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to
an insigniﬁcant risk of changes in value. An investment normally qualiﬁes as
cash equivalents only when it has a short maturity, of say, three months or less
from the date of acquisition. Investments in shares are excluded from cash
equivalents unless they are in substantial cash equivalents. For example,
preference shares of a company acquired shortly before their speciﬁc redemption
date, provided there is only insignificant risk of failure of the company to repay
the amount at maturity. Similarly, short-term marketable securities which can
be readily converted into cash are treated as cash equivalents and is liquidable
immediately without considerable change in value.

6.4 Cash Flows

‘Cash Flows' implies movement of cash in and out due to some non—cash items.
Receipt of cash from a non—cash item is termed as cash inﬂow while cash payment
in respect of such items as cash outﬂow. For example, purchase of machinery
by paying cash is cash outﬂow while sale proceeds received from sale of
machinery is cash inﬂow. Other examples of cash ﬂows include collection of
cash from trade receivables, payment to trade payables, payment to employees,
receipt of dividend, interest payments, etc.

Cash management includes the investment of excess cash in cash equivalents.
Hence, purchase of marketable securities or short-term investment which
constitutes cash equivalents is not considered while preparing cash ﬂow
statement.

6.5 Classification of Activities for the Preparation of Cash Flow
Statement

You know that various activities of an enterprise result into cash ﬂows (inﬂows
or receipts and outﬂows or payments) which is the subject matter of a cash ﬂow
statement. As per AS—3, these activities are to be classiﬁed into three categories:
(1) operating, (2) investing, and (3) ﬁnancing activities so as to show separately
the cash ﬂows generated (or used) by (in) these activities. This helps the users of
cash ﬂow statement to assess the impact of these activities on the ﬁnancial position
of an enterprise and also on its cash and cash equivalents.