238 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

6.5.1 Cash from Operating Activities

Operating activities are the activities that constitute the primary or main activities
of an enterprise. For example, for a company manufacturing garments, operating
activities are procurement of raw material, incurrence of manufacturing expenses,
sale of garments, etc. These are the principal revenue generating activities (or
the main activities) of the enterprise and these activities are not investing or
ﬁnancing activities. The amount of cash from operations' indicates the internal
solvency level of the company, and is regarded as the key indicator of the extent
to which the operations of the enterprise have generated sufﬁcient cash ﬂows to
maintain the operating capability of the enterprise, paying dividends, making of
new investments and repaying of loans without recourse to external source of
ﬁnancing.

Cash ﬂows from operating activities are primarily derived from the main
activities of the enterprise. They generally result from the transactions and other
events that enter into the determination of net profit or loss. Examples of cash
ﬂows from operating activities are:

Cash Inﬂows from operating activities

0 cash receipts from sale of goods and the rendering of services.
0 cash receipts from royalties, fees, commissions and other revenues.

Cash Outﬂows from operating activities

0 Cash payments to suppliers for goods and services.

Cash payments to and on behalf of the employees.

0 Cash payments to an insurance enterprise for premiums and claims,
annuities, and other policy beneﬁts.

0 Cash payments of income taxes unless they can be speciﬁcally identiﬁed
with ﬁnancing and investing activities.

The net position is shown in case of operating cash ﬂows.

An enterprise may hold securities and loans for dealing or for trading
purposes. In either case they represent Inventory speciﬁcally held for resale.
Therefore, cash ﬂows arising from the purchase and sale of dealing or trading
securities are classified as operating activities. Similarly, cash advances and
loans made by ﬁnancial enterprises are usually classiﬁed as operating activities
since they relate to main activity of that enterprise.

6.5.2 Cash from Investing Activities

As per AS—3, investing activities are the acquisition and disposal of long—term
assets and other investments not included in cash equivalents. Investing activities
relate to purchase and sale of long—term assets or ﬁxed assets such as machinery,