160

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

Basis for ﬁscal policies:The ﬁscal policies, particularly taxation policies
of the government, are related with the ﬁnancial performance of
corporate undertakings. The ﬁnancial statements provide basic input
for industrial, taxation and other economic policies of the government.
Basis for granting of credit: Corporate undertakings have to borrow
funds from banks and other ﬁnancial institutions for different purposes.
Credit granting institutions take decisions based on the ﬁnancial
performance of the undertakings. Thus, ﬁnancial statements form the
basis for granting of credit.

Basis for prospective investors: The investors include both short-term
and long-term investors. Their prime considerations in their investment
decisions are security and liquidity of their investment with reasonable
profitability. Financial statements help the investors to assess long-
term and short—term solvency as well as the proﬁtability of the concern.
Guide to the value of the investment already made: Shareholders of
companies are interested in knowing the status, safety and return on
their investment. They may also need information to take decision
about continuation or discontinuation of their investment in the
business. Financial statements provide information to the shareholders
in taking such important decisions.

Aids trade associations in helping their members: Trade associations
may analyse the ﬁnancial statements for the purpose of providing
service and protection to their members. They may develop standard
ratios and design uniform system of accounts.

Helps stock exchanges: Financial statements help the stock exchanges
to understand the extent of transparency in reporting on ﬁnancial
performance and enables them to call for required information to protect
the interest of investors. The ﬁnancial statements enable the Stock
brokers to judge the ﬁnancial position of different concerns and take
decisions about the prices to be quoted.

3.6 Limitations of Financial Statements

Though utmost care is taken in the preparation of the ﬁnancial statements and
provide detailed information to the users, they suffer from the following
limitations:

1.

Do not reﬂect current situation: Financial statements are prepared on
the basis of historical cost. Since the purchasing power of money is
changing, the values of assets and liabilities shown in ﬁnancial
statement do not reﬂect current market situation.

Assets may not realise: Accounting is done on the basis of certain
conventions. Some of the assets may not realise the stated values, if