2 1 6 Accountancy
Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Meaning of trial balance: A statement showing the abstract of the balance
[debit/credit] of various accounts in the ledger.

2. Objectives of trial balance: The main objectives of preparing the trial balance
are : (i) to ascertain the arithmetical accuracy of the ledger accounts; [ii] to
help in locating errors; and [iii] to help in the preparatioon of the final accounts.

3. Preparation of trial balance by the balance method: In this method, the trial
balance has three columns. The first column is for the head of the account,
the second column for writing the debit balance and the third for the credit
balance of each account in the ledger.

4. Various types of errors:

(i) Errors of commission: Errors caused due to wrong recording of a
transaction, wrong totalling, wrong casting, wrong balancing, etc.

(ii) Errors of Omission: Errors caused due to omission of recording a
transaction entirely or party in the books of account.

(iii) Errors of Principle: Errors arising due to wrong classificatrion of receipts
and payments between revenue and capital receipts and revenue and
capital expenditure.

(iv) Compensating errors: Two or more errors committed in such a way that
they nullify the effect of each other on the debits and credits.

5. Rectification of errors: Errors affecting only one account can be rectified by
giving an explanatory note or by passing a journal entry. Errors which affect
two or more accounts are rectified by passing a journal entry.

6. Meaning and utility of suspense account: An account in which the difference
in the trial balance is put till such time that errors are located and rectified.
It facilitates the preparation of financial statements even when the trial balance
does not tally.

7. Disposal of suspense account: When all the errors are located and rectified
the suspense account stands disposed off.

Questions for Practice

Short Answers

1. State the meaning of a trial balance?

Give two examples of errors of principle?

Give two examples of errors of commission?
What are the methods of preparing trial balance?

What are the steps taken by an accountant to locate the errors in the trial
balance?

What is a suspense account? Is it necessary that is suspense account will
balance off after rectification of the errors detected by the accountant? If
not, then what happens to the balance still remaining in suspense account?

7. What kinds of errors would cause difference in the trial balance. Also list
examples that would not be revealed by a trial balance?

8. State the limitations of trial balance?

VFW.”

S»

2019-2020