Accounting for Share Capital 1 7

1.6.2 Calls in Advance

Sometimes shareholders pay a part or the whole of the amount of the calls not
yet made. The amount so received from the shareholders is known as “Calls in
Advance". The amount received in advance is a liability of the company and
should be credited to ‘Call in Advance Account.” The amount received will be
adjusted towards the payment of calls as and when they becomes due. Table F
of the Companies Act provides for the payment of interest on calls in advance at
a rate not exceeding 12% per annum.

The following joumal entIy is recorded for the amount of calls received in advance.

Bank A/c Dr.
To Calls in Advance A/c
(Amount received on call in advance)

On the due date of the calls, the amount of ‘Calls in Advance' is adjusted by the
following entry :

Calls in Advance A/c Dr.
To Particular Call A/c
{Calls in advance adjusted with the call money due)

The balance in ‘Calls in Advance' account is shown as a separate item under the
title Equity and Liabilities in the company’s balance sheet under the head ‘cw'rent
liabilities’, as sub-head ‘others current liabilities’. It is not added to the amount of
paid—up capital.

As ‘Calls in Advance' is a liability of the company, it is under obligation, if
provided by the Articles, to pay interest on such amount from the date of its
receipt up to the date when appropriate call is due for payment. A stipulation is
generally made in the Articles regarding the rate at which interest is payable.
However, if Articles are silent on this account, Table F is applicable which provides
for interest on calls in advance at a rate not exceeding 12% per annum.

The accounting treatment of interest on Calls in Advance is as follows:

1. For Payment of Interest
Interest on Calls in Advance A/c Dr.
To Bank A/c
(Interest paid on Calls in Advance)
Or
2. (a) For Interest due
Interest on Calls in Advance A/c Dr.
To Sundry Shareholder’s A/c
[Interest paid on Calls in Advance)
2. (b) For Interest Paid
Sundry Shareholder’s A/c Dr.
To Bank A/c