Cash Flow Statement 239

furniture, land and building, etc. Transactions related to long-term investment
are also investing activities.

Separate disclosure of cash ﬂows from investing activities is important
because they represent the extent to which expenditures have been made for
resources intended to generate future income and cash ﬂows. Examples of cash
ﬂows arising from investing activities are:

Cash Outﬂows from investing activities

0 Cash payments to acquire fixed assets including intangibles and
capitalised research and development.

0 Cash payments to acquire shares, warrants or debt instruments of other
enterprises other than the instruments those held for trading purposes.

0 Cash advances and loans made to third party (other than advances
and loans made by a ﬁnancial enterprise wherein it is operating
activities).

Cash Inﬂows from Investing Activities

0 Cash receipt from disposal of fixed assets including intangibles.

0 Cash receipt from the repayment of advances or loans made to third
parties (except in case of ﬁnancial enterprise).

0 Cash receipt from disposal of shares, warrants or debt instruments of
other enterprises except those held for trading purposes.

0 Interest received in cash from loans and advances.

o Dividend received from investments in other enterprises.

6.5.3 Cash from Financing Activities

As the name suggests, ﬁnancing activities relate to long-term funds or capital of
an enterprise, e. g., cash proceeds from issue of equity shares, debentures, raising
long—terrn bank loans, repayment of bank loan, etc. As per AS-3, ﬁnancing
activities are activities that result in changes in the size and composition of the
owners' capital (including preference share capital in case of a company) and
borrowings of the enterprise. Separate disclosure of cash ﬂows arising from
ﬁnancing activities is important because it is useful in predicting claims on future
cash ﬂows by providers of funds (both capital and borrowings) to the enterprise.
Examples of ﬁnancing activities are:

Cash Inﬂows from ﬁnancing activities

0 Cash proceeds from issuing shares (equity or/ and preference).
0 Cash proceeds from issuing debentures, loans, bonds and other short/
long-term borrowings.