Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 191

case of two errors compensating each other’s effect. One plus is set off by the
other minus, the net effect of these two errors is nil and so they do not affect the
agreement of trial balance.

6.5 Searching of Errors

If the trial balance does not tally, it is a clear indication that at least one error
has occured. The error (or errors) needs to be located and corrected before
preparing the ﬁnancial statements.

If the trial balance does not tally, the accountant should take the following

steps to detect and locate the errors :

Recast the totals of debit and credit columns of the trial balance.
Compare the account head / title and amount appearing in the trial balance,
with that of the ledger to detect any difference in amount or omission of an
account.

Compare the trial balance of current year with that of the previous year to
check additions and deletions of any accounts and also verify whether
there is a large difference in amount, which is neither expected nor
explained.

Re-do and check the correctness of balances of individual accounts in
the ledger.

Re-check the correctness of the posting in accounts from the books of
original entry.

If the difference between the debit and credit columns is divisible by 2,
there is a possibility that an amount equal to one-half of the difference
may have been posted to the wrong side of another ledger account. For
example, if the total of the debit column of the trial balance exceeds by
? 1,500, it is quite possible that a credit item of ?750 may have been wrongly
posted in the ledger as a debit item. To locate such errors, the accountant
should scan all the debit entries of an amount of ? 750.

The difference may also indicate a complete omission of a posting. For
example, the difference of ? 1,500 given above may be due to omissions of a
posting of that amount on the credit side. Thus, the accountant should verify
all the credit items with an amount of ? 1,500.

If the difference is a multiple of 9 or divisible by 9, the mistake could be due
to transposition of figures. For example, if a debit amount of ? 459 is posted
as ? 954, the debit total in the trial balance will exceed the credit side by
? 495 (i.e. 954 — 459 = 495). This difference is divisible by 9. A mistake due
to wrong placement of the decimal point may also be checked by this method.
Thus, a difference in trial balance divisible by 9 helps in checking the errors
for a transposed mistake.

2019-2020