Accounting for Share Capital 2 3

over subscription within the total frame of application and allotment, i.e. receipt
of application amount, amount due on allotment and its receipt from the
shareholders, and the same has been observed in the pattern of entries.

First Alternative :When the directors decide to fully accept some applications
and totally reject the others, the application money received on rejected
applications is fully refunded. For example, a company invited applications for
20,000 shares and received the applications for 25,000 shares. The directors
rejected the applications for 5,000 shares which are in excess of the required
number and refunded their application money in full. In this case, the journal
entries on application and allotment will be as follows :

The journal entries on application and allotment according to this alternative
are as follows:

1 Bank A/ c Dr.
To Share Application A/c
(Money received on application for 25,000
shares @ Rs. _ per share)

2 Share Application A/c Dr.
To Share Capital A/c
To Bank A/c
[Transfer of application for money 20,000 for
shares allotted and money refunded on
applications for 5,000 shares rejected)

3 Share Allotment A/c Dr.
To Share Capital A/c
(Amount due on the allotment of 20,000
shares @ Rs. _ per share)

4 Bank A/c Dr.
To Share Allotment A/c
(Allotment money received)

Second Alternative :When the directors opt to make a proportionate allotment
to all applicants (called ‘pro-rata' allotment), the excess application money
received is normally adjusted towards the amount due on allotment. In case,
the excess application money received is more than the amount due on allotment
of shares, such excess amount may either be refunded or credited to calls in
advance.

For example, in the event of applications for 20,000 shares being invited
and those received are for 25,000 shares, it is decieded to allot shares in the
ratio of 4:5 to all applicants. It is a case of pro—rata allotment and the excess
application money received on 5,000 shares would be adjusted towards the
amount due on the allotment of 20,000 shares. In this case, the journal entries
on application and allotment will be as follows.