Issue and Redemption of Debentures 1 05

Do it Yourself

Diwakar enterprises Ltd. Issued 10,00,000, 6% debentures on April 1, 20 16.
Interest is paid on September 30, 20 16 and March 3 1, 20 17.

Record necessary journal entries assuming that income tax is deducted @ 10%

of the amount of interest.

Laser India Ltd. Issued 7,00,000, 8% debentures of Rs 100 each at par. Interest
is to be paid on these debentures half-yearly on September 30 and March 31,
every year. Record necessary j ournal entries asuming that income tax is deducted
@ 10% of the amount of interest.

 

2.10 Writing-off Discount/Loss on Issue of Debentures

The discount/ loss on issue of debentures is a capital loss or a ﬁctitious asset
and, therefore, must be written-off during the life time of debentures. The
amount of discount/ loss on issue of debentures should normally not be
written-off in the year of issue itself since the benefit of the debentures would
accrue to the company till their redemption. The discount/ loss on it is,
therefore, treated as capital loss. The discount may be charged to Securities
Premium A/c or may be written—off over 3 to 5 years through statement of
profit and loss as per guidelines issued by ICAI. In case, however, there are
no capital profits or if the capital proﬁts are not adequate, the amount of
such discount/ loss can be written—off against the revenue profits every year

by passing the following journal entry.
Statement of Proﬁt and Loss Dr.
To Discount/ Loss on Issue of
Debentures A/c

(Discount/ loss on issue of debentures
written-oft]

There are two methods, which can be adopted to write off discount/ loss on

issue of debentures against the revenue profits. These are as follows.

1. Fixed Instalment Method: When the debentures are redeemed at the end of
a speciﬁed period, the total amount of discount should be written off in equal
instalments of ﬁxed amount over that period. For example, if the debentures
are to be redeemed after 10 years then out of the total amount of discount of
Rs. 1 ,00,000, Rs. 10,000 will be written-off every year.

2. Fluctuating Instalment Method: When debentures are repaid by annual
drawings or in instalments, the discount should be written-off in the ratio of
debentures outstanding as at the end of each accounting year. The amount
of discount, under this method, goes on reducing year. The amount of
discount, under this method, goes on reducing every year and so this method
may also be known as Reducing Instalment Method.

For example, a company issues Rs. 1 5,00,000, 9% debentures at a discount of

10% redeemable by annual drawings of Rs. 3,00,000 at the end of each year.

The amount of discount to be written-off will be calculated as under: