4 6 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

II. Balance on Shares Forfeited Account
Amount paid by Chitnis :

1,920 Shares applied for X Rs. 4 per share 7,680
Amount paid by J agdale :

2,000 Shares X (Rs. 4 + Rs. 3) Rs.7 per share 14,000
Total balance 21 680

 

Note : Premium amount on Jagdale’s shares will not be taken into account as it has
been received in full by the company.

1.7.1 Re—issue of Forfeited Shares

The directors can either cancel or re-issue the forefeited shares. In most cases,
they reissue such shares which may be at par, at premium or at a discount.
Forfeited shares may be reissued as fully paid at a par, premium, discount. In
this context, it may be noted that the amount of discount allowed cannot exceed
the amount that had been received on forfeited shares at the time of initial issue,
and that the discount allowed on reissue of forfeited shares should be debited to
the ‘Forfeited Share Account'. The balance, if any, left in the Share—Forfeited
Account relating to reissued Shares, should be treated as capital proﬁt and
transferred to Capital Reserve Account. For example, when a company forfeits
200 shares of Rs. 10 each on which Rs. 600 had been received, it can allow a
maximum discount of Rs. 600 on their reissue. Assuming that the company
reissues these shares for Rs. 1,800 as fully paid, the necessary journal entry
will be:

Bank A/c Dr. 1,800
Share Forfeiture A/c Dr. 200
To Share Capital A/c 2,000
(Reissue of 200 forfeited shares at Rs. 9 per
share as fully paid)

This shall leave a balance of Rs. 400 in share forfeited account which should
be transferred to Capital Reserve Account by recording the following journal

entry:
Share Forfeiture A/c Dr. 400
To Capital Reserve 400

(Proﬁt on reissue of forfeited shares
transferred)

Another important point to be noted in this context is that the capital proﬁt
arises only in respect of the foreﬁted share reissued, and not on all forefeited
shares. Hence, when a part of the forfeited shares are reissued, the whole balance
of share forfeiture account cannot be transferred to the capital reserve. In such