190

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

bright spots of the business. The knowledge of problem areas help management
take care of them in future. The knowledge of areas which are working better
helps you improve the situation further. It must be emphasised that ratios are
means to an end rather than the end in themselves. Their role is essentially
indicative and that of a whistle blower. There are many advantages derived from
ratio analysis. These are summarised as follows:

1.

Helps to understand efﬁcacy of decisions: The ratio analysis helps
you to understand whether the business ﬁrm has taken the right kind
of operating, investing and ﬁnancing decisions. It indicates how far
they have helped in improving the performance.

Simplify complex figures and establish relationships: Ratios help in
simplifying the complex accounting figures and bring out their
relationships. They help summarise the ﬁnancial information effectively
and assess the managerial efﬁciency, ﬁrm's credit worthiness, earning
capacity, etc.

Helpful in comparative analysis: The ratios are not be calculated for
one year only. When many year ﬁgures are kept side by side, they help
a great deal in exploring the trends visible in the business. The
knowledge of trend helps in making projections about the business
which is a very useful feature.

Identiﬁcation of problem areas: Ratios help business in identifying
the problem areas as well as the bright areas of the business. Problem
areas would need more attention and bright areas will need polishing
to have still better results.

Enables SWOT analysis: Ratios help a great deal in explaining the
changes occurring in the business. The information of change helps
the management a great deal in understanding the current threats
and opportunities and allows business to do its own SWOT (Strength-
Weakness-Opportunity—Threat) analysis.

Various comparisons: Ratios help comparisons with certain bench
marks to assess as to whether ﬁrm's performance is better or otherwise.
For this purpose, the proﬁtability, liquidity, solvency, etc., of a business,
may be compared: (i) over a number of accounting periods with itself
(Intra—ﬁrm Comparison /Time Series Analysis), (ii) with other business
enterprises (Inter-ﬁrm Comparison/Cross-sectional Analysis) and
(iii) with standards set for that ﬁrm / indusz (comparison with standard
(or industry expectations).

5.4 Limitations of Ratio Analysis

Since the ratios are derived from