202 Accountancy

Suspense A/c Dr. 1 ,000
To Purchases A/c 1,000

6. 6.3 Rectiﬁcation of Errors in the Next Accounting Year

If some errors committed during an accounting year are not located and
rectified before the finalisation of ﬁnancial statements, suspense account
cannot be closed and its balance will be carried forward to the next accounting
period. When the errors committed in one accounting year are located and
rectified in the next accounting year, profit and loss adjustment account is
debited or credited in place of accounts of expenses/losses and incomes/
gains in order to avoid impact on the income statement of next accounting
period. You will learn about this aspect at an advanced stage of your studies
in accounting.

Box 1

Guiding Principles of Rectiﬁcation of Errors

If error is committed in books of original entry then assume all postings are
done accordingly.

If error is at the posting stage then assume that recording in the subsidiary
books has been correctly done.

If error is in posting to a wrong account [without mentioning side and amount of
posting] then assume that posting has been done on the right side and with the
right amount.

If posting is done to a correct account but with wrong amount [without mentioning
side of posting) then assume that posting has been done on the correct side.

If error is posting to a wrong account on the wrong side (without mentioning
amount of posting) then assume that posting has been done with the amount as
per the original recording of the transaction.

If error is of posting to a wrong account with wrong amount [without mentioning
the side of posting] then assume that posting has been done on the right side.

If posting is done to a correct account on the wrong side (without mentioning
amount of posting] then assume that posting has been done with correct amount
as per original recording.

Any error in posting of individual transactions in subsidiaries books relates to
individual account only, the sales account, purchase account, sales return
account or purchases return account are not involved.

 

2019-2020