Accounting for Share Capital 3

(ii)

(iii)

his part whatsoever may be the debts of the company. He need not pay a
single paise from his private property. However, if there is any liability
involved, it can be enforced during the existence of the company as well
as during the winding up.

Companies Limited by Guarantee: In this case, the liability of its members
is limited to the amount they undertake to contribute in the event of the
company being wound up. Thus, the liability of the members will arise
only in the event of its winding up.

Unlimited Companies: When there is no limit on the liability of its
members, the company is called an unlimited company. When the
company’s property is not sufﬁcient to pay off its debts, the private
property of its members can be used for the purpose. In other words, the
creditors can claim their dues from its members. Such companies are
not found in India even though permitted by the Companies Act.

On the basis of the number of members, companies can be divided into
three categories as follows:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Public Company: A public company means a company which (a) is not a
private company; (b) is a company which is not a subsidiary of a private

company.

Private Company: A private company is one which by its articles:

(a) Restricts the right to transfer its shares;

(b) A private company must have at least 2 persons, except in case of
one person company;

(c) Limits the number of its members to 200 (excluding its employees);

One Person Company (OPC): Sec. 2 (62) of the companies Act, 2013,
deﬁnes OPC as a “company which has only one person as a member”.
Rule 3 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 20 14 provides that:

(a) Only a natural person being an Indian citizen and resident in
India can form one person company,

(b) It cannot carry out non-banking financial investment activities.

(c) Its paid up share capital is not more than Rs. 50 Lakhs

(d) Its average annual turnover of three years does not exceed
Rs. 2 Crores.

1.3 Share Capital of a Company

A company, being an artiﬁcial person, cannot generate its own capital which has
necessarily to be collected from several persons. These persons are known as
shareholders and the amount contributed by them is called share capital. Since the
number of shareholders is very very large, a separate capital account cannot be
opened for each one of them. Hence, innumerable streams of capital contribution
merge their identities in a common capital account called as ‘Share Capital Account'.