6 2 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

Termes Used in the Chapter

1. Joint Stock Company 16. Premium on Shares

2. Share Capital 17. Application Money

3. Authorised Capital 18. Minimum Subscription
4. Issued Capital 19. Calls on Shares

5. Unissued Capital 20. Calls in Arrears

6. Subscribed Capital 21. Calls in Advance

7. Subscribed and fully paid-up 22. Over subscription

8. Subscribed but not fully paid up 23. Under subscription

9. Paid-up Capital 24. Forfeiture of Shares
10. Reserve Capital 25. Reissue of forfeited shares
11. Shares 26. Buy-back of Shares
12. Preference Shares
13. Non-redeemable Preference Shares
14. Equity Shares
15. Issue of Shares for Consideration

Other than Cash
Summary

Company: An organisation consisting of individuals called ‘shareholders’ by virtue
of their holding the shares of a company, who can act as legal person as regards
its business through board of directors.

Share: Fractional part of the capital, and forms the basis of ownership in a company.
Shares are generally of two types, viz. equity shares and preference shares,
according to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. Preference shares again
are of different types based on varying shades of rights attached to them.

Share Capital of a company is collected by issuing shares to either a select
group of persons through the route of private placements and/ or offered to the
public for subscription. Thus, the issue of shares is basic to the capital of a
company. Shares are issued either for cash or for consideration other than
cash, the former being more common. Shares are said to be issued for
consideration other than cash when a company purchases business, or some
asset/ assets, and the vendors have agreed to receive payment in the form of
fully paid shares of a company.

Stages of Share Issue: The issue of shares for cash is required to be made in strict
conformity with the procedure laid down by law for the same. When shares are
issued for cash, the amount on them can be collected at one or more of the following
stages:

(i) Application for shares
(ii) Allotment of shares
(iii) Call/ Calls on shares.

Calls in Arrears: Sometimes, the full amount called on allotment and/ or call (calls)
is not received from the allottees/ shareholders. The amount not so received are