2

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

it has certain special features which distinguish it from the other forms of
organisation. These are as follows:

Body Corporate: A company is formed according to the provisions of
Law enforced from time to time. Generally, in India, the companies are
formed and registered under Companies Law except in the case of Banking
and Insurance companies for which a separate Law is provided for.
Separate Legal Entity: A company has a separate legal entity which is
distinct and separate from its members. It can hold and deal with any
type of property. It can enter into contracts and even open a bank account
in its own name.

Limited Liability: The liability of the members of the company is limited
to the extent of unpaid amount of the shares held by them. In the case of
the companies limited by guarantee, the liability of its members is limited
to the extent of the guarantee given by them in the event of the company
being wound up.

Perpetual Succession: The company being an artiﬁcial person created by
law continues to exist irrespective of the changes in its membership. A
company can be terminated only through law. The death or insanity or
insolvency of any member of the company in no way affects the existence of
the company. Members may come and go but the company continues.
Common Seal: The company being an artiﬁcial person, cannot sign its name
by itself. Therefore, every company is required to have its own seal which
acts as ofﬁcial signatures of the company. Any document which does not
carry the common seal of the company is not binding on the company.
Transferability of Shares: The shares of a public limited company are
freely transferable. The permission of the company or the consent of any
member of the company is not necessary for the transfer of shares. But
the Articles of the company can prescribe the manner in which the transfer
of shares will be made.

May Sue or be Sued: A company being a legal person can enter into
contracts and can enforce the contractual rights against others. It can
sue and be sued in its name if there is a breach of contract by the company.

1.2 Kinds of Companies

Companies can be classiﬁed either on the basis of the liability of its members or
on the basis of the number of members. On the basis of liability of its members
the companies can be classiﬁed into the following three categories:

(1)

Companies Limited by Shares: In this case, the liability of its members is
limited to the extent of the nominal value of shares held by them. If a
member has paid the full amount of the shares, there is no liability on