1 62 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

Balance Sheet: The balance sheet shows all the assets owned by the concern, all
the obligations or liabilities payable to outsiders or creditors and claims of the
owners on a particular date. It is one of the important statements depicting the
ﬁnancial position or status or strength of an undertaking.

Statement of Proﬁt and Loss: The Statement of proﬁt and loss is prepared for a
specific period to determine the operational results of an undertaking. It is a
statement of revenue earned and the expenses incurred for earning the revenue.
It is a performance report showing the changes in income, expenses, proﬁts and
losses as a result of business operations during the year between two balance
sheet dates.

Signiﬁcance of Financial Statements: The users of financial statements include
Shareholders, Investors, Creditors, Lenders, Customers, Management, Government,
etc. Financial statements help all the users in their decision-making process. They
provide data about general purpose needs of these members.

Limitations of Financial Statements: Financial statements are not free from limitations.
They provide only aggregate information to satisfy the general purpose needs of
the users. They are technical statements understood by only persons having some
accounting knowledge. They reﬂect historical information but not current situation,
which is essential in any decision making. In addition, one can get idea about the
organisation’s performance in terms of quantitative changes but not in qualitative
terms like labour relations, quality of work, employees satisfaction, etc. The ﬁnancial
statements are neither complete nor accurate as the ﬂow of income and expenses
are segregated using best judgement apart from accepted concepts. Hence, these
statements need proper analysis before their use in decision—making.

Questions for Practice

Short Answer Questions
1. State the meaning of ﬁnancial statements?
2. What are limitations of ﬁnancial statements?
3. List any three objectives of ﬁnancial statements?
4. State the importance of ﬁnancial statements to :
(i) shareholders
(ii) creditors
(iii) government
(iv) investors