190 Accountancy

But while posting to the ledger, Preetpal’s account was debited with ? 2,500
only. This constitutes an error of commission. Such an error by definition is of
clerical nature and most of the errors of commission affect in the trial balance.

6.4.3 Errors of Omission

The errors of omission may be committed at the time of recording the transaction
in the books of original entry or while posting to the ledger. These can be of two
types:

(i) error of complete omission

(ii) error of partial omission

When a transaction is completely omitted from recording in the books of

original record, it is an error of complete omission. For example, credit sales
to Mohan ? 10,000, not entered in the sales book. When the recording of
transaction is partly omitted from the books, it is an error of partial omission.
If in the above example, credit sales had been duly recorded in the sales book
but the posting from sales book to Mohan’s account has not been made, it
would be an error of partial omission.

6.4.4 Errors of Principle

Accounting entries are recorded as per the generally accepted accounting
principles. If any of these principles are violated or ignored, errors resulting
from such Violation are known as errors of principle. An error of principle may
occur due to incorrect classiﬁcation of expenditure or receipt between capital
and revenue. This is very important because it will have an impact on financial
statements. It may lead to under/ over stating of income or assets or liabilities,
etc. For example, amount spent on additions to the buildings should be treated
as capital expenditure and must be debited to the asset account. Instead, if
this amount is debited to maintenance and repairs account, it has been treated
as a revenue expense. This is an error of principle. Similarly, if a credit purchase
of machinery is recorded in purchases book instead of j ournal proper or rent
paid to the landlord is recorded in the cash book as payment to landlord,
these errors of principle. These errors do not affect the trial balance.

6.4.5 Compensating Errors

When two or more errors are committed in such a way that the net effect of these
errors on the debits and credits of accounts is nil, such errors are called
compensating errors. Such errors do not affect the tallying of the trial balance.
For example, if purchases book has been overcast by ? 10,000 resulting in
excess debit of ? 10,000 in purchases account and sales returns book is
undercast by ? 10,000 resulting in short debit to sales returns account is a

2019-2020