140

Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

3.2 Nature of Financial Statements

The chronologically recorded facts about events expressed in monetary terms
for a deﬁned period of time are the basis for the preparation of periodical ﬁnancial
statements which reveal the ﬁnancial position as on a date and the ﬁnancial
results obtained during a period. The American Institute of Certiﬁed Public
Accountants states the nature of ﬁnancial statements as, “the statements
prepared for the purpose of presenting a periodical review of report on progress
by the management and deal with the status of investment in the business and
the results achieved during the period under review. They reﬂect a combination
of recorded facts, accounting principles and personal judgements".

The following points explain the nature of ﬁnancial statements:

1.

Recorded Facts: Financial statements are prepared on the basis of
facts in the form of cost data recorded in accounting books. The original
cost or historical cost is the basis of recording transactions. The ﬁgures
of various accounts such as cash in hand, cash at bank, trade
receivables, ﬁxed assets, etc., are taken as per the ﬁgures recorded in
the accounting books. The assets purchased at different times and at
different prices are put together and shown at costs. As these are not
based on market prices, the ﬁnancial statements do not show current
ﬁnancial condition of the concern.

Accounting Conventions: Certain accounting conventions are followed
while preparing financial statements. The convention of valuing
inventory at cost or market price, whichever is lower, is followed. The
valuing of assets at cost less depreciation principle for balance sheet
purposes is followed. The convention of materiality is followed in dealing
with small items like pencils, pens, postage stamps, etc. These items
are treated as expenditure in the year in which they are purchased
even though they are assets in nature. The stationery is valued at cost
and not on the principle of cost or market price, whichever is less. The
use of accounting conventions makes ﬁnancial statements comparable,
simple and realistic.

Postulates: Financial statements are prepared on certain basic
assumptions (pre-requisites) known as postulates such as going
concern postulate, money measurement postulate, realisation
postulate, etc. Going concern postulate assumes that the enterprise is
treated as a going concern and exists for a longer period of time. So the
assets are shown on historical cost basis. Money measurement
postulate assumes that the value of money will remain the same in
different periods. Though there is drastic change in purchasing power
of money, the assets purchased at different times will be shown at the