l l 0 Accountancy

main cash book itself. In such instances, the petty cash book is not maintained
independently.)

The petty cash book generally has a number of columns for the amount on
the payment side (credit) besides the ﬁrst other amount column. Each of the
amount columns is allotted for items of specific payments, which are most
common. The last amount column is designated as ‘Miscellaneous’ followed by
a ‘Remarks’ column. In the miscellaneous column those payments are recorded
for which a separate column does not exist. In the ‘Remarks’ the nature of
payment is recorded. At the end of the period, all amount columns are totaled.
The total amount column 1 shows the total amount spent and to be reimbursed.
On the receipt (debit) side, there is only one amount column. Columns for the
date, voucher number and particulars are common for both receipts and

payments.

Box 1
Advantages of Maintaining Petty Cash Book

Saving of Time and efforts of chief cashier: The chief cashier is not required to
deal with petty disbursements. He can concentrate on cash transactions involving
large amount of cash. It saves time and labour and helps chief cashier to discharge
his duties more effectively

Effective control over cash disbursements: Cash control becomes easy because of
division of work. The head cashier can control big payments directly and petty
payments by keeping a proper check on the petty cashier. This way the chances

of making frauds and embezzlements become very difficult.

Convenient recording: Recording of petty disbursements in the main cash book
makes it bulky and unmanageable. Further, the materiality principle requires
that insignificant details need not be given in the main cashbook. This way the
cash book reveals only material and useful information.

Recording of such small payments becomes easy as the totals of different types
of expenses are posted to ledger. It also saves time and effort of posting individual
items in the ledger. In nutshell it can be stated that preparation of petty cash
book is a cost reduction control measure.

 

For example, Mr. Mohit, the petty cahier of M/s Samaira Traders received
Rupees 2,000 on May 01, 2017 from the Head Cashier. For the month, details
of petty expenses are listed here under:

2019-2020