1 46 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements

vii) Shares reserved for issue under options and contracts /
commitments for the sale of shares / disinvestment, including terms
and amount.

viii) For a period of 5 years immediately proceeding the date at which

balance sheet in prepared for:

(a) Shares reserved under contracts / commitments.

(b) Number and class of shares bought back.

(c) Number and class of shares allotted for consideration other
than cash and bonus shares.

ix) Terms of any securities convertible into equity/ preference shares
issued along with earliest date of conversion in descending order,
starting from the farthest such date.

X) Calls unpaid (aggregate).
xi) Forfeited shares (amout originally paid up).

Reserve and Surplus
Reserves and Surplus are required to be classiﬁed as:
i) Capital Reserve

ii) Capital Redemption Reserve

iii) Securities Premium Reserve

iv) Debenture Redemption Reserve

v) Revaluation Reserve

vi) Share Options Outstanding Account

vii) Other Reserves (Specifying nature and purpose)

viii) Surplus: Balance in statement of proﬁt and loss; disclosing allocations
and Appropriation such as dividend, bonus shares, transfer to / from
reserve, etc.

Signiﬁcant additions / modiﬁcations regarding disclosure of reserve and surplus
are as follows:

a) A reserve speciﬁcally represented by earmarked investments shall be
termed as “Fund”.

b) ‘Debit' balance of statement of proﬁt and loss shall be shown as a negative
ﬁgure under ‘Surplus' head.

c) The balance of “Reserve and Surplus" after adjusting negative balance of
Surplus, if any, shall be shown under “Reserve and Surplus” read even
if the resulting ﬁgure is ‘negative'.

d) Share options outstanding account has been recognised as a separate
item under ‘Reserve and Surplus'. ICAI's Guidance Note on Accounting
for Employee share based payments requires a credit balance in the ‘Stock
option outstanding Account’ to be disclosed in balance sheet under
separate heading' between share capital and reserves and surplus as a
part of shareholders fund.