Accounting for Share Capital 9

Irrespective of the fact that shares are issued at par or at a premium, the
share capital of a company as stated earlier, may be collected in instalments
payable at different stages.

1.6 Accounting Treatment

On application :The amount of money paid with various instalment represents
the contribution to share capital and should ultimately be credited to share
capital. However, for the sake of convenience, initially individual accounts are
opened for each instalment. All money received along with application is deposited

with a scheduled bank in a separate account opened for the purpose. The joumal
entry is as follows:

Bank A/c Dr.
To Share Application A/c
(Amount received on application for — shares @ Rs. per share)

On allotment :When minimum subscription has been received and certain legal
formalities on the allotment of shares have been duly compiled with, the directors
of the company proceed to make the allotment of shares.

The allotment of shares implies a contract between the company and the

applicants who now become the allottees and assume the status of shareholders
or members.

Allotment of Shares
(Implications from accounting point of view)

It is customary to ask for some amount called “Allotment Money" from the
allottees on the shares allotted to them as soon as the allotment is made.

With the acceptance to the offer made by the applicants, the amount of
application money received has to be transferred to share capital account as it
has formally become the part of the same.

The money received on rejected applications should either be fully returned to
the applicant within period prescribed by law/SEBI.

In case lesser number of shares have to be allotted. than those applied for the
excess application money must be adjusted towards the amount due on allotment
from the allottees.

The effect of the later two steps is to close the share application account which
is only a temporary account for share capital transactions.