Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 183

and credit balances in the trial balance are equal, it is assumed that the posting
and balancing of accounts is arithmetically correct. However, the tallying of the
trial balance is not a conclusive proof of the accuracy of the accounts. It only
ensures that all debits and the corresponding credits have been properly recorded
in the ledger.

6.2.2 To Help in Locating Errors

When a trial balance does not tally (that is, the totals of debit and credit columns
are not equal), we know that at least one error has occured. The error (or errors)
may have occured at one of those stages in the accounting process: (1) totalling
of subsidiary books, (2) posting of j ournal entries in the ledger, (3) calculating
account balances, (4) carrying account balances to the trial balance, and (5)
totalling the trial balance columns.

It may be noted that the accounting accuracy is not ensured even if the
totals of debit and credit balances are equal because some errors do not affect
equality of debits and credits. For example, the book-keeper may debit a correct
amount in the wrong account while making the journal entry or in posting a
journal entry to the ledger. This error would cause two accounts to have
incorrect balances but the trial balance would tally. Another error is to record
an equal debit and credit of an incorrect amount. This error would give the
two accounts incorrect balances but would not create unequal debits and
credits. As a result, the fact that the trial balance has tallied does not imply
that all entries in the books of original record (journal, cash book, etc.) have
been recorded and posted correctly. However, equal totals do suggest that
several types of errors probably have not occured.

6.2.3 To Help in the Preparation of the Financial Statements

Trial balance is considered as the connecting link between accounting records
and the preparation of financial statements. For preparing a financial
statement, one need not refer to the ledger. In fact, the availability of a tallied
trial balance is the first step in the preparation of ﬁnancial statements. All
revenue and expense accounts appearing in the trial balance are transferred
to the trading and profit and loss account and all liabilities, capital and assets
accounts are transferred to the balance sheet.

(Preparation of the ﬁnancial statements is explained in chapters, 9 and 1 0).

2019-2020