Alternating Current

 

with the source frequency and the attractive force would average to
zero. Thus, the ac ampere must be defined in terms of some property
that is independent of the direction of the current. Joule heating
is such a property, and there is one ampere of rms value of
alternating current in a circuit if the current produces the same
average heating effect as one ampere of dc current would produce
under the same conditions.

In an ac circuit, while adding voltages across different elements, one
should take care of their phases properly. For example, if VR and VC
are voltages across R and C. respectively in an RC circuit, then the

total voltage across RC combination is VRC =‘IVE +VC2j and not
VR + VC since VC is 7r/2 out of phase of VR.

Though in a phasor diagram, voltage and current are represented by
vectors, these quantities are not really vectors themselves. They are
scalar quantities. It so happens that the amplitudes and phases of
harmonically varying scalars combine mathematically in the same
way as do the projections of rotating vectors of corresponding
magnitudes and directions. The “rotating vectors” that represent
harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide
us with a simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that
we already know as the law of vector addition.

There are no power losses associated with pure capacitances and pure
inductances in an ac circuit. The only element that dissipates energy
in an ac circuit is the resistive element.

In a RLC circuit, resonance phenomenon occur when XL = XC or

I
(00 = —. For resonance to occur, the presence of both L and C

x/E

elements in the circuit is a must. With only one of these (L or C)
elements, there is no possibility of voltage cancellation and hence,
no resonance is possible.

The power factor in a RLC circuit is a measure of how close the
circuit is to expending the maximum power.

.In generators and motors, the roles of input and output are
reversed. In a motor, electric energy is the input and mechanical
energy is the output. In a generator, mechanical energy is the
input and electric energy is the output. Both devices simply
transform energy from one form to another.

. A transformer (step—up) changes a low—voltage into a high—voltage.
This does not violate the law of conservation of energy. The
current is reduced by the same proportion.

. The choice of whether the description of an oscillatory motion is
by means of sines or cosines or by their linear combinations is
unimportant, since changing the zero—time position transforms
the one to the other.

 

265