92

PHYSICS

Galileo Galilei (1564 - 1642)

Galileo Galilei. born in Pisa, Italy in 1564 was a key figure in the scientiﬁc revolution
in Europe about four centuries ago. Galileo proposed the concept of acceleration.
From experiments on motion of bodies on inclined planes or falling freely. he
contradicted the Aristotelian notion that a force was required to keep a body in
motion. and that heavier bodies fall faster than lighter bodies under gravity. He
thus arrived at the law of inertia that was the starting point of the subsequent

epochal work of Isaac Newton.

Galileo's discoveries in astronomy were equally revolutionary. In 1609. he designed
his own telescope (invented earlier in Holland) and used it to make a number of

startling observations : mountains and depressions on the surface of the moon:
dark spots on the sun: the moons of J upiter and the phases of Venus. He concluded
that the Milky Way derived its luminosity because of a large number of stars not visible to the naked eye.
In his masterpiece of scientiﬁc reasoning : Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems, Galileo advocated
the heliocentric theory of the solar system proposed by Copernicus. which eventually got universal

acceptance.

With Galileo came a turning point in the very method of scientiﬁc inquiry. Science was no longer
merely observations of nature and inferences from them. Science meant devising and doing experiments
to verify or refute theories. Science meant measurement of quantities and a search for mathematical

relations between them. Not undeservedly. many regard Galileo as the father of modern science.

More often, however, we do not know all the
forces to begin with. In that case, if we know
that an object is unaccelerated (i.e. it is either
at rest or in uniform linear motion), we can infer
from the ﬁrst law that the net external force on
the object must be zero. Gravity is everywhere.
For terrestrial phenomena, in particular, every
object experiences gravitational force due to the
earth. Also objects in motion generally experience
friction, viscous drag, etc. If then, on earth, an
object is at rest or in uniform linear motion, it is
not because there are no forces acting on it, but
because the various external forces cancel out
i.e. add up to zero net external force.

Consider a book at rest on a horizontal surface
Fig. (5.2(a)). It is subject to two external forces :
the force due to gravity (i.e. its weight W) acting
downward and the upward force on the book by
the table, the normal force R . Ris a self-adjusting
force. This is an example of the kind of situation
mentioned above. The forces are not quite known
fully but the state of motion is known. We observe
the book to be at rest. Therefore, we conclude
from the first law that the magnitude of R equals
that of W. A statement often encountered is :
“Since W= R, forces cancel and, therefore, the book
is at rest”. This is incorrect reasoning. The correct
statement is : “Since the book is observed to be at
rest, the net external force on it must be zero,
according to the ﬁrst law. This implies that the

2019-20

 

normal force R must be equal and opposite to the
weight W

 

(a) (b)

Fig. 5.2 (a) a book at rest on the table, and (b) a car
moving with uniform velocity. The net force
is zero in each case.

Consider the motion of a car starting from
rest, picking up speed and then moving on a
smooth straight road with uniform speed (Fig.
(5.2(b)). When the car is stationary, there is no
net force acting on it. During pick-up, it
accelerates. This must happen due to a net
external force. Note, it has to be an external force.
The acceleration of the car cannot be accounted
for by any internal force. This might sound
surprising, but it is true. The only conceivable
external force along the road is the force of
friction. It is the frictional force that accelerates
the car as a whole. (You will learn about friction
in section 5.9). When the car moves with
constant velocity, there is no net external force.