34

Pl IYSICS

 

l
or, T= k\/:
9

Note that value of constant k can not be obtained
by the method of dimensions. Here it does not
matter if some number multiplies the right side
of this formula, because that does not affect its
dimensions.

Dimensional analysis is very useful in deducing
relations among the interdependent physical
quantities. However, dimensionless constants
cannot be obtained by this method. The method
of dimensions can only test the dimensional
validity, but not the exact relationship between
physical quantities in any equation. It does not
distinguish between the physical quantities
having same dimensions.

A number of exercises at the end of this

I . . .
Actually, k = 27: so that T: 2”- _ ‘ chapter w111 help you develop skill in
g d1mens1onal analys1s.
SUMMARY
1. Physics is a quantitative science, based on measurement of physical quantities. Certain

10.

11.

12.

physical quantities have been chosen as fundamental or base quantities [such as length,
mass, time, electric current, thermodynamic temperature, amount of substance, and
luminous intensity].

Each base quantity is defined in terms of a certain basic, arbitrarily chosen but properly
standardised reference standard called unit (such as metre, kilogram, second, ampere,
kelvin, mole and candela). The units for the fundamental or base quantities are called
fundamental or base units.

Other physical quantities, derived from the base quantities, can be expressed as a
combination of the base units and are called derived units. A complete set of units,
both fundamental and derived, is called a system of units.

The International System of Units (SI) based on seven base units is at present
internationally accepted unit system and is Widely used throughout the world.

The SI units are used in all physical measurements, for both the base quantities and
the derived quantities obtained from them. Certain derived units are expressed by
means of SI units with special names [such as joule, newton, watt, etc).

The SI units have well defined and internationally accepted unit symbols [such as m for
metre, kg for kilogram, s for second, A for ampere, N for newton etc.).

Physical measurements are usually expressed for small and large quantities in scientific
notation, with powers of 10. Scientific notation and the prefixes are used to simplify
measurement notation and numerical computation, giving indication to the precision
of the numbers.

Certain general rules and guidelines must be followed for using notations for physical
quantities and standard symbols for SI units, some other units and SI prefixes for
expressing properly the physical quantities and measurements.

In computing any physical quantity, the units for derived quantities involved in the
relationship(s) are treated as though they were algebraic quantities till the desired
units are obtained.

Direct and indirect methods can be used for the measurement of physical quantities.
In measured quantities, while expressing the result, the accuracy and precision of
measuring instruments along with errors in measurements should be taken into account.
In measured and computed quantities proper significant figures only should be retained.
Rules for determining the number of significant figures, carrying out arithmetic
operations with them, and ‘rounding off ‘ the uncertain digits must be followed.

The dimensions of base quantities and combination of these dimensions describe the
nature of physical quantities. Dimensional analysis can be used to check the dimensional
consistency of equations, deducing relations among the physical quantities, etc. A
dimensionally consistent equation need not be actually an exact (correct) equation,
but a dimensionally wrong or inconsistent equation must be wrong.

2019-20