22

PHYSICS

 

Table 2.4 Range and order of masses

Electron

Proton

Uranium atom

Red blood cell
Dust particle

Rain drop
Mosquito

Grape

Human
Automobile

Boeing 747 aircraft
Moon

Earth

Sun

Milky way galaxy
Observable Universe

 

2.5 MEASUREMENT OF TIME

To measure any time interval we need a clock.
We now use an atomic standard of time, which
is based on the periodic vibrations produced in
a cesium atom. This is the basis of the cesium
clock, sometimes called atomic clock, used in
the national standards. Such standards are
available in many laboratories. In the cesium
atomic clock, the second is taken as the time
needed for 9,192.63 1,770 vibrations of the
radiation corresponding to the transition
between the two hyperfine levels of the ground
state of cesium- 133 atom. The vibrations of the
cesium atom regulate the rate of this cesium
atomic clock just as the vibrations of a balance
wheel regulate an ordinary wristwatch or the
vibrations of a small quartz crystal regulate a
quartz wristwatch.

The cesium atomic clocks are very accurate.
In principle they provide portable standard. The
national standard of time interval ‘second’ as
well as the frequency is maintained through four
cesium atomic clocks. A cesium atomic clock is
used at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL),
New Delhi to maintain the Indian standard of
time.

In our country, the NFL has the responsibility
of maintenance and improvement of physical
standards, including that of time, frequency, etc.
Note that the Indian Standard Time (IST) is
linked to this set of atomic clocks. The efficient
cesium atomic clocks are so accurate that they
impart the uncertainty in time realisation as

2019-20

i l x 10—13, i.e. 1 part in 1013. This implies that
the uncertainty gained over time by such a
device is less than 1 part in 1013; they lose or
gain no more than 3 us in one year. In View of
the tremendous accuracy in time measurement,
the SI unit of length has been expressed in terms
the path length light travels in certain interval
of time (1/299, 792, 458 of a second) (Table 2.1).

The time interval of events that we come
across in the universe vary over a very wide
range. Table 2.5 gives the range and order of
some typical time intervals.

You may notice that there is an interesting
coincidence between the numbers appearing
in Tables 2.3 and 2.5. Note that the ratio of the
longest and shortest lengths of objects in our
universe is about 1041. Interestingly enough,
the ratio of the longest and shortest time
intervals associated with the events and objects
in our universe is also about 1041. This number,
1041 comes up again in Table 2.4, which lists
typical masses of objects. The ratio of the
largest and smallest masses of the objects in
our universe is about (10“)? Is this a curious
coincidence between these large numbers
purely accidental ?

2. 6 ACCURACY, PRECISION OF INSTRUMENTS
AND ERRORS IN MEASUREMENT

Measurement is the foundation of all
experimental science and technology. The result
of every measurement by any measuring
instrument contains some uncertainty. This
uncertainty is called error. Every calculated
quantity which is based on measured values,
also has an error. We shall distinguish between
two terms: accuracy and precision. The
accuracy of a measurement is a measure of how
close the measured value is to the true value of
the quantity. Precision tells us to what resolution
or limit the quantity is measured.

The accuracy in measurement may depend on
several factors, including the limit or the resolution
of the measuring instrument. For example, suppose
the true value of a certain length is near 3.678 cm.
In one experiment, using a measuring instrument
of resolution 0. 1 cm, the measured value is found to
be 3.5 cm, while in another experiment using a
measuring device of greater resolution, say 0.0 1 cm,
the length is determined to be 3.38 cm. The ﬁrst
measurement has more accuracy (because it is