PHYSICS

Now mxr=meP=mx(OC+CP)
But meC=0asmis along 00
Hence wxr=waP

The vector (u x CP is perpendicular to a), i.e.
to the z-axis and also to CF, the radius of the
circle described by the particle at P. It is
therefore, along the tangent to the circle at P.
Also, the magnitude of a) x CP is a) (CP) since
a) and CP are perpendicular to each other. We
shall denote CP by ri and not by r, as we did
earlier.

Thus, a) x r is a vector of magnitude (ori

and is along the tangent to the circle described
by the particle at P. The linear velocity vector v
at P has the same magnitude and direction.
Thus,

v = a) x r (7.20)

In fact, the relation, Eq. (7 .20), holds good
even for rotation of a rigid body with one point
fixed, such as the rotation of the top [Fig. 7 .6(a)].
In this case r represents the position vector of
the particle with respect to the fixed point taken
as the origin.

We note that for rotation about a ﬁxed
axis, the direction of the vector a) does not
change with time. Its magnitude may,
however, change from instant to instant. For
the more general rotation, both the
magnitude and the direction of mmay change
from instant to instant.

7.6. 1 Angular acceleration

You may have noticed that we are developing
the study of rotational motion along the lines
of the study of translational motion with which
we are already familiar. Analogous to the kinetic
variables of linear displacement (s) and velocity
(v) in translational motion, we have angular
displacement (0) and angular velocity (0)) in
rotational motion. It is then natural to define
in rotational motion the concept of angular
acceleration in analogy with linear acceleration
defined as the time rate of change of velocity in
translational motion. We define angular
acceleration a as the time rate of change of
angular velocity; Thus,

_dm

“—5

(7.21)

2019-20

If the axis of rotation is fixed, the direction
of a) and hence, that of a is fixed. In this case
the vector equation reduces to a scalar equation

_da)

a_ _
dt (7.22)

7.7 TORQUE AND AN GUIAR MOMENTUM

In this section, we shall acquaint ourselves with
two physical quantities (torque and angular
momentum) which are deﬁned as vector products
of two vectors. These as we shall see, are
especially important in the discussion of motion
of systems of particles, particularly rigid bodies.

7.7.1 Moment of force (Torque)

We have learnt that the motion of a rigid body,
in general, is a combination of rotation and
translation. If the body is fixed at a point or along
a line, it has only rotational motion. We know
that force is needed to change the translational
state of a body, i.e. to produce linear
acceleration. We may then ask, what is the
analogue of force in the case of rotational
motion? To look into the question in a concrete
situation let us take the example of opening or
closing of a door. A door is a rigid body which
can rotate about a fixed vertical axis passing
through the hinges. What makes the door
rotate? It is clear that unless a force is applied
the door does not rotate. But any force does not
do the job. A force applied to the hinge line
cannot produce any rotation at all, whereas a
force of given magnitude applied at right angles
to the door at its outer edge is most effective in
producing rotation. It is not the force alone, but
how and where the force is applied is important
in rotational motion.

The rotational analogue of force in linear
motion is moment of force. It is also referred to
as torque or couple. (We shall use the words
moment of force and torque interchangeably.)
We shall first define the moment of force for the
special case of a single particle. Later on we
shall extend the concept to systems of particles
including rigid bodies. We shall also relate it to
a change in the state of rotational motion, i.e. is
angular acceleration of a rigid body.