Nuclei

which increases the temperature of the core. If this temperature increases
to about 108 K, fusion takes place again, this time of helium nuclei into
carbon. This kind of process can generate through fusion higher and
higher mass number elements. But elements more massive than those
near the peak of the binding energy curve in Fig. 13.1 cannot be so
produced.

The age of the sun is about 5X 109 y and it is estimated that there is
enough hydrogen in the sun to keep it going for another 5 billion years.
After that, the hydrogen burning will stop and the sun will begin to cool
and will start to collapse under gravity, which will raise the core
temperature. The outer envelope of the sun will expand, turning it into

the so called red giant.

In a single uranium fission about 0.9X235 MeV (z200 MeV) of energy is liberated. If
each nucleus of about 50 kg of 235U undergoes fission the amount of energy involved is
about 4 X 1015J. This energy is equivalent to about 20,000 tons of TNT, enough for a
superexplosion. Uncontrolled release of large nuclear energy is called an atomic explosion.
On August 6, 1945 an atomic device was used in warfare for the ﬁrst time. The US
dropped an atom bomb on Hiroshima, Japan. The explosion was equivalent to 20,000
tons of TNT. Instantly the radioactive products devastated 10 sq km of the city which
had 3,43,000 inhabitants. Of this number 66,000 were killed and 69,000 were injured;
more than 67% of the city’s structures were destroyed.

High temperature conditions for fusion reactions can be created by exploding a fission
bomb. Super-explosions equivalent to 1 0 megatons of explosive power of TNT were tested
in 1954. Such bombs which involve fusion of isotopes of hydrogen, deuterium and tritium
are called hydrogen bombs. It is estimated that a nuclear arsenal sufﬁcient to destroy
every form of life on this planet several times over is in position to be triggered by the
press of a button. Such a nuclear holocaust will not only destroy the life that exists now
but its radioactive fallout will make this planet unﬁt for life for all times. Scenarios based
on theoretical calculations predict a long nuclear winter, as the radioactive waste will
hang like a cloud in the earth’s atmosphere and will absorb the sun’s radiation.

13.7.4 Controlled thermonuclear fusion

The natural thermonuclear fusion process in a star is replicated in a
thermonuclear fusion device. In controlled fusion reactors, the aim is to
generate steady power by heating the nuclear fuel to a temperature in the
range of 108 K. At these temperatures, the fuel is a mixture of positive
ions and electrons (plasma). The challenge is to confine this plasma, since
no container can stand such a high temperature. Several countries
around the world including India are developing techniques in this
connection. If successful, fusion reactors will hopefully supply almost
unlimited power to humanity.

2019-20

457