Electric Charges
and Fields

projection of area normal to E, or E1 AS, i.e., component of E along the
normal to the area element times the magnitude of the area element. The
unit of electric ﬂux is N C‘1 m2.

The basic definition of electric ﬂux given by Eq. (1. 1 1) can be used, in
principle, to calculate the total ﬂux through any given surface. All we
have to do is to divide the surface into small area elements, calculate the
ﬂux at each element and add them up. Thus, the total ﬂux ¢ through a

surface S is
¢:>:E-As (1.12)

The approximation sign is put because the electric ﬁeld E is taken to
be constant over the small area element. This is mathematically exact
only when you take the limit AS —> O and the sum in Eq. (1.12) is written
as an integral.

1. 1 1 ELECTRIC DIPOLE

An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite point charges q and —q,
separated by a distance 2a. The line connecting the two charges defines
a direction in space. By convention, the direction from —q to q is said to
be the direction of the dipole. The mid-point of locations of —q and q is
called the centre of the dipole.

The total charge of the electric dipole is obviously zero. This does not
mean that the field of the electric dipole is zero. Since the charge q and
—q are separated by some distance, the electric fields due to them, when
added, do not exactly cancel out. However, at distances much larger than
the separation of the two charges forming a dipole (r >> 2a), the fields
due to q and —q nearly cancel out. The electric field due to a dipole
therefore falls off, at large distance, faster than like 1 / r2 (the dependence
on r of the field due to a single charge q). These qualitative ideas are
borne out by the explicit calculation as follows:

1.1 1.1 The ﬁeld of an electric dipole

The electric field of the pair of charges {—q and q) at any point in space
can be found out from Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle.
The results are simple for the following two cases: (i) when the point is on
the dipole axis, and (ii) when it is in the equatorial plane of the dipole,
i.e., on a plane perpendicular to the dipole axis through its centre. The
electric field at any general point P is obtained by adding the electric
ﬁelds E _q due to the charge —q and Eq due to the charge q, by the
parallelogram law of vectors.

(i) For points on the axis

Let the point P be at distance r from the centre of the dipole on the side of
the charge q, as shown in Fig. 1.20(a). Then

q
E_q = —WP [1.13(a)]

where f» is the unit vector along the dipole axis (from —q to q). Also

q
E+q = WP [1.13(b)]

2019-20

27