362

10.

ll.

12.

14.1

14.2

14.3

PHYSICS

From point 4 above. given amplitude or energy. phase of motion is determined by the
initial position or initial velocity.

A combination of two simple harmonic motions with arbitrary amplitudes and phases
is not necessarily periodic. It is periodic only if frequency of one motion is an integral
multiple of the other's frequency. However. a periodic motion can always be expressed
as a sum of infinite number of harmonic motions with appropriate amplitudes.

The period of SHM does not depend on amplitude or energy or the phase constant.
Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation [Kepler's third
law).

The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement.

For motion of a particle to be simple harmonic. its displacement xmust be expressible
in either of the following forms :

x=Acos wt + Bsin wt
x=Acos[wt+a).x= Bsin[wt+ﬁ)

The three forms are completely equivalent (any one can be expressed in terms of any
other two forms).

Thus. damped simple harmonic motion [Eq. [14.31)] is not strictly simple harmonic. It
is approximately so only for time intervals much less than 2m/ b where b is the damping
constant.

In forced oscillations. the steady state motion of the particle (after the forced oscillations
die out) is simple harmonic motion whose frequency is the frequency of the driving
frequency cod. not the natural frequency a) of the particle.

In the ideal case of zero damping, the amplitude of simple harmonic motion at resonance
is infinite. Since all real systems have some damping. however small. this situation is
never observed.

Under forced oscillation. the phase of harmonic motion of the particle differs from the
phase of the driving force.

 

Exercises

Which of the following examples represent periodic motion?

(a) A swimmer completing one (return) trip from one bank of a river to the other
and back.

(b) A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N—S direction and released.

[0) A hydrogen molecule rotating about its centre of mass.

[(1) An arrow released from a bow.

Which of the following examples represent (nearly) simple harmonic motion and

which represent periodic but not simple harmonic motion?

(a) the rotation of earth about its axis.

(b) motion of an oscillating mercury column in a U—tube.

(c) motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when released from a
point slightly above the lower most point.

(d) general vibrations of a polyatomic molecule about its equilibrium position.

Fig. 14.23 depicts four x—t plots for linear motion of a particle. Which of the plots
represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ?

2019-20