MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

265

 

10.6. 1 Surface Energy

A liquid stays together because of attraction
between molecules. Consider a molecule well
inside a liquid. The intermolecular distances are
such that it is attracted to all the surrounding
molecules [Fig. 10.16(a)]. This attraction results
in a negative potential energy for the molecule,
which depends on the number and distribution
of molecules around the chosen one. But the
average potential energy of all the molecules is
the same. This is supported by the fact that to
take a collection of such molecules (the liquid)

(at) 0?)

terms of this fact. What is the energy required
for having a molecule at the surface? As
mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy
required to remove it entirely from the liquid
i.e., half the heat of evaporation.

Finally, what is a surface? Since a liquid
consists of molecules moving about, there cannot
be a perfectly sharp surface. The density of the
liquid molecules drops rapidly to zero around
2 = O as we move along the direction indicated
Fig 10.16 (c) in a distance of the order of a few
molecular sizes.

 

(C)

Fig. 1 0. 1 6 Schematic picture of molecules in a liquid, at the surface and balance of forces. (a) Molecule inside

a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of

repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface. (c) Balance of attractive (AI and repulsive (R) forces.

and to disperse them far away from each other
in order to evaporate or vaporise, the heat of
evaporation required is quite large. For water it
is of the order of 40 kJ/mol.

Let us consider a molecule near the surface
Fig. 10.16(b). Only lower half side of it is
surrounded by liquid molecules. There is some
negative potential energy due to these, but
obviously it is less than that of a molecule in
bulk, i.e., the one fully inside. Approximately
it is half of the latter. Thus, molecules on a
liquid surface have some extra energy in
comparison to molecules in the interior. A
liquid, thus, tends to have the least surface
area which external conditions permit.
Increasing surface area requires energy. Most
surface phenomenon can be understood in

10.6.2 Surface Energy and Surface Tension

As we have discussed that an extra energy is
associated with surface of liquids, the creation
of more surface (spreading of surface) keeping
other things like volume fixed requires
additional energy. To appreciate this, consider
a horizontal liquid ﬁlm ending in bar free to slide
over parallel guides Fig (10.17).

—>1 d|<—

 

(a) (b)
Fig. 1 O. 1 7 Stretching a ﬁlm. (a) A ﬁlm in equilibrium;
(b) The film stretched an extra distance.

2019-20