l Physics

 

_ 6.63x10*34Js
4.50x kgm/s
1': 1.47 ><10“34 m
The de Broglie wavelength of electron is comparable with X-ray

wavelengths. However, for the ball it is about 10‘19 times the size of
the proton, quite beyond experimental measurement.

Example 11.5 An electron, an oc-particle, and a proton have the same I

EXAMPLE 11.4

kinetic energy. Which of these particles has the shortest de Broglie
wavelength?

Solution

For a particle, de Broglie wavelength, A = h/ p

Kinetic energy, K = pZ/Zm

Then, i=h/«l2mK

For the same kinetic energy K, the de Broglie wavelength associated
with the particle is inversely proportional to the square root of their

masses. A proton (iH) is 1836 times massive than an electron and

an oc-particle (gHe) four times that of a proton.
Hence, 0L — particle has the shortest de Broglie wavelength.

PROBABILITY INTERPRETATION T0 MATTER WAVES

It is worth pausing here to reﬂect on just what a matter wave associated with a particle,
say, an electron, means. Actually, a truly satisfactory physical understanding of the
dual nature of matter and radiation has not emerged so far. The great founders of
quantum mechanics (Niels Bohr, Albert Einstein, and many others) struggled with this
and related concepts for long. Still the deep physical interpretation of quantum
mechanics continues to be an area of active research. Despite this, the concept of
matter wave has been mathematically introduced in modern quantum mechanics with
great success. An important milestone in this connection was when Max Born (1882-
1970) suggested a probability interpretation to the matter wave amplitude. According
to this, the intensity (square of the amplitude) of the matter wave at a point determines
the probability density of the particle at that point. Probability density means probability
per unit volume. Thus, if A is the amplitude of the wave at a point, |A| 2 AV is the
probability of the particle being found in a small volume AV around that point. Thus,
if the intensity of matter wave is large in a certain region, there is a greater probability
of the particle being found there than Where the intensity is small. ‘

Example 11.6 A particle is moving three times as fast as an electron.

S The ratio of the de Broglie wavelength of the particle to that of the
-1 electron is 1.813 X 10‘4. Calculate the particle’s mass and identify the
a particle.

5 Solution

III

de Broglie wavelength of a moving particle, having mass m and
4.02 velocity D:

2019-20