46

PHYSICS

that the acceleration is nonuniform over the
period 0 s to 10 s. It is zero between 10 s and
18 s and is constant with value —12 m S'2
between 18 s and 20 s. When the acceleration
is uniform, obviously, it equals the average
acceleration over that period.

Since velocity is a quantity having both
magnitude and direction, a change in velocity
may involve either or both of these factors.
Acceleration, therefore, may result from a
change in speed (magnitude), a change in
direction or changes in both. Like velocity,
acceleration can also be positive, negative or
zero. Position-time graphs for motion with
positive, negative and zero acceleration are
shown in Figs. 3.9 (a), (b) and (c), respectively.
Note that the graph curves upward for positive
acceleration; downward for negative
acceleration and it is a straight line for zero
acceleration. As an exercise, identify in Fig. 3.3,
the regions of the curve that correspond to these
three cases.

Although acceleration can vary with time,
our study in this chapter will be restricted to
motion with constant acceleration. In this case,
the average acceleration equals the constant
value of acceleration during the interval. If the
velocity of an object is v at t= O and v at time t,
we have 0

 

a_v—v0 or v-v +at (36)
_ t — 0 ’ _ 0 '
T Positive a T Negative a T a= 0
x X
0 t—> 0 t—’
(a) (b)

 

Fig. 3.9 Position—time graph for motion with
(a) positive acceleration; (b) negative
acceleration, and (c) zero acceleration.

Let us see how velocity-time graph looks like
for some simple cases. Fig. 3.10 shows velocity-
time graph for motion with constant acceleration
for the following cases :

(a) An object is moving in a positive direction
with a positive acceleration, for example
the motion of the car in Fig. 3.3 between
t= O sand t= 10 s.

2019-20

(b) An object is moving in positive direction
with a negative acceleration, for example,
motion of the car in Fig 3.3 between
1:: 18 s and 20 s.

(c) An object is moving in negative direction
with a negative acceleration, for example
the motion of a car moving from O in Fig.
3.1 in negative x-direction with
increasing speed.

(d) An object is moving in positive direction
till time t1, and then turns back with the
same negative acceleration, for example
the motion of a car from point 0 to point
Q in Fig. 3.1 till time t1 with decreasing
speed and turning back and moving with
the same negative acceleration.

An interesting feature of a velocity-time graph
for any moving object is that the area under the
curve represents the displacement over a
given time interval. A general proof of this

 

   

(d)

Fig. 3.10 Velocity—time graph for motions with
constant acceleration (a) Motion in positive
direction with positive acceleration,
(b) Motion in positive direction with
negative acceleration, (c) Motion in negative
direction with negative acceleration,
(d) Motion of an object with negative
acceleration that changes direction at time

t1. Between times 0 to t1, its moves in

positive x — direction and between t1 and

t2 it moves in the opposite direction.