384

l Physics

10.11

10.12

10.13

10.14

10.15

10.16

10.17

 

 

 

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

The 6563 A H0: line emitted by hydrogen in a star is found to be red-
shifted by 15 A. Estimate the speed with which the star is receding
from the Earth.

Explain how Corpuscular theory predicts the speed of light in a
medium, say, water, to be greater than the speed of light in vacuum.
Is the prediction confirmed by experimental determination of the
speed of light in water? If not, which alternative picture of light is
consistent with experiment?

You have learnt in the text how Huygens’ principle leads to the laws
of reﬂection and refraction. Use the same principle to deduce directly
that a point object placed in front of a plane mirror produces a
virtual image whose distance from the mirror is equal to the object
distance from the mirror.

Let us list some of the factors, which could possibly inﬂuence the
speed of wave propagation:

(i) nature of the source.

(ii) direction of propagation.

(iii) motion of the source and/ or observer.

(iv) wavelength.

(v) intensity of the wave.

On which of these factors, if any, does

(a) the speed of light in vacuum,

(b) the speed of light in a medium (say, glass or water),

depend?

For sound waves, the Doppler formula for frequency shift differs
slightly between the two situations: (i) source at rest; observer
moving, and (ii) source moving; observer at rest. The exact Doppler
formulas for the case of light waves in vacuum are, however, strictly
identical for these situations. Explain why this should be so. Would

you expect the formulas to be strictly identical for the two situations
in case of light travelling in a medium?

In double-slit experiment using light of wavelength 600 nm, the
angular width of a fringe formed on a distant screen is 0. 1°. What is
the spacing between the two slits?

Answer the following questions:

(a) In a single slit diffraction experiment, the width of the slit is
made double the original width. How does this affect the size
and intensity of the central diffraction band?

(b) In what way is diffraction from each slit related to the
interference pattern in a double-slit experiment?

(c) When a tiny circular obstacle is placed in the path of light from
a distant source, a bright spot is seen at the centre of the shadow
of the obstacle. Explain why?

((1) Two students are separated by a 7 m partition wall in a room
10 m high. If both light and sound waves can bend around

2019-20