8.1

Electromagnetic
Woves

 

names; y-rays. X—rays, ultraviolet rays, visible rays. infrared rays,
microwaves and radio waves in order of increasing wavelength from 10‘2 A
or 10'12m to 106m.

They interact with matter via their electric and magnetic fields which set
in oscillation charges present in all matter. The detailed interaction and
so the mechanism of absorption, scattering. etc.. depend on the wavelength
of the electromagnetic wave, and the nature of the atoms and molecules
in the medium.

POINTS TO PONDER

1. The basic difference between various types of electromagnetic waves
lies in their wavelengths or frequencies since all of them travel through
vacuum with the same speed. Consequently, the waves differ
considerably in their mode of interaction with matter.

2. Accelerated charged particles radiate electromagnetic waves. The
wavelength of the electromagnetic wave is often correlated with the
characteristic size of the system that radiates. Thus. gamma radiation.
having wavelength of 10'14 m to 10'15 m, typically originate from an
atomic nucleus. X—rays are emitted from heavy atoms. Radio waves
are produced by accelerating electrons in a circuit. A transmitting
antenna can most efficiently radiate waves having a wavelength of
about the same size as the antenna. Visible radiation emitted by atoms
is, however, much longer in wavelength than atomic size.

3. The oscillating fields of an electromagnetic wave can accelerate charges
and can produce oscillating currents. Therefore, an apparatus designed
to detect electromagnetic waves is based on this fact. Hertz original
‘receiver’ worked in exactly this way. The same basic principle is utilised
in practically all modern receiving devices. High frequency
electromagnetic waves are detected by other means based on the
physical effects they produce on interacting with matter.

4. Infrared waves, with frequencies lower than those of visible light.
Vibrate not only the electrons. but entire atoms or molecules of a
substance. This vibration increases the internal energy and
consequently, the temperature of the substance. This is why infrared
waves are often called heat waves.

5. The centre of sensitivity of our eyes coincides with the centre of the
wavelength distribution of the sun. It is because humans have evolved
with visions most sensitive to the strongest wavelengths from
the sun.

Figure 8.6 shows a capacitor made of two circular plates each of
radius 12 cm, and separated by 5.0 cm. The capacitor is being
charged by an external source (not shown in the figure). The
charging current is constant and equal to 0.15A.

EXERCISES

(a) Calculate the capacitance and the rate of change of potential
difference between the plates.

2019-20

285