Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

 

 
  
  
 
 
    

Obj ective
mirror

Secondary

mirror \

Eyepiece

FIGURE 9.30 Schematic diagram of a reﬂecting telescope (Cassegrain).

convex secondary mirror to focus the incident light, which now passes
through a hole in the objective primary mirror, is shown in Fig. 9.30.
This is known as a Cassegrain telescope, after its inventor. It has the
advantages of a large focal length in a short telescope. The largest telescope
in India is in Kavalur, Tamil Nadu. It is a 2.34 m diameter reﬂecting
telescope (Cassegrain). It was ground, polished, set up, and is being used
by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore. The largest reﬂecting
telescopes in the world are the pair of Keck telescopes in Hawaii, USA,
with a reﬂector of 10 metre in diameter.

SUMMARY

1. Reﬂection is governed by the equation Ai = Ar’ and refraction by the
Snell’s law, sini/ sinr = n, where the incident ray, reﬂected ray, refracted
ray and normal lie in the same plane. Angles of incidence, reﬂection
and refraction are i, r’ and r, respectively.

2. The critical angle of incidence iC for a ray incident from a denser to rarer
medium, is that angle for which the angle of refraction is 90°. For
i> ic, total internal reﬂection occurs. Multiple internal reﬂections in
diamond [iC a 24.4°), totally reﬂecting prisms and mirage, are some
examples of total internal reﬂection. Optical fibres consist of glass
fibres coated with a thin layer of material of lower refractive index.
Light incident at an angle at one end comes out at the other, after
multiple internal reﬂections, even if the fibre is bent.

3. Cartesian sign convention: Distances measured in the same direction
as the incident light are positive; those measured in the opposite
direction are negative. All distances are measured from the pole / optic
centre of the mirror / lens on the principal axis. The heights measured
upwards above x—axis and normal to the principal axis of the mirror /
lens are taken as positive. The heights measured downwards are taken
as negative.

2019-20

341