l Physics

 

interesting to note what Richard Feynman* has said in his famous
Feynman Lectures on Physics:

No one has ever been able to deﬁne the difference between
interference and diffraction satisfactorily. It is just a question
of usage, and there is no speciﬁc, important physical difference
between them. The best we can do is, roughly speaking, is to
say that when there are only a few sources, say two interfering
sources, then the result is usually called interference, but if there
is a large number of them, it seems that the word diffraction is
more often used.

In the double-slit experiment, we must note that the pattern on the
screen is actually a superposition of single-slit diffraction from each slit
or hole, and the double-slit interference pattern. This is shown in
Fig. 10.17. It shows a broader diffraction peak in which there appear
several fringes of smaller width due to double-slit interference. The
number of interference fringes occuring in the broad diffraction peak
depends on the ratio d/ a, that is the ratio of the distance between the
two slits to the width of a slit. In the limit of a becoming very small, the
diffraction pattern will become very ﬂat and we will obsrve the two-slit
interference pattern [see Fig. 10.13(b)].

0

 

FIGURE 10.17 The actual double—slit interference pattern.
The envelope shows the single slit diffraction.

Example 10.5 In Example 10.3, what should the width of each slit be
to obtain 10 maxima of the double slit pattern within the central
maximum of the single slit pattern?

Interactive animation on single slit diffraction pattern

1837!. http://www.physhawaii.edu/~teb/optiCS/java/slitdiffr/

,
3

Solution We want a6 = 1,9 = i

(1

'u
,5! .,
r" 57"?-

La

“ t
\

10£=2i a=i=02 mm
d a 5
Notice that the wavelength of light and distance of the screen do not

enter in the calculation of a.

EXAMPLE 10.5

In the double-slit interference experiment of Fig. 10. 12, what happens
if we close one slit? You will see that it now amounts to a single slit. But
you will have to take care of some shift in the pattern. We now have a
source at S, and only one hole (or slit) S1 or S2. This will produce a single-

* Richand Feynman was one of the recipients of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
for his fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics.

370

2019-20