488

 

 

l Physics

EXAMPLE 14.6

 

fractional change in the majority carriers (i.e., An/ n) would be much
less than that in the minority carriers (i.e., Ap/ p). In general, we can
state that the fractional change due to the photo-effects on the
minority carrier dominated reverse bias current is more easily
measurable than the fractional change in the forward bias current.
Hence, photodiodes are preferably used in the reverse bias condition
for measuring light intensity.

(ii) Light emitting diode

It is a heavily doped p-n junction which under forward bias emits
spontaneous radiation. The diode is encapsulated with a transparent
cover so that emitted light can come out.

When the diode is forward biased, electrons are sent from n —> p (where
they are minority carriers) and holes are sent from p —> n (where they are
minority carriers). At the junction boundary the concentration of minority
carriers increases compared to the equilibrium concentration (i.e., when
there is no bias). Thus at the junction boundary on either side of the
junction, excess minority carriers are there which recombine with majority
carriers near the junction. On recombination, the energy is released in
the form of photons. Photons with energy equal to or slightly less than
the band gap are emitted. When the forward current of the diode is small,
the intensity of light emitted is small. As the forward current increases,
intensity of light increases and reaches a maximum. Further increase in
the forward current results in decrease of light intensity. LEDs are biased
such that the light emitting efﬁciency is maximum.

The V—I characteristics of a LED is similar to that of a Si junction
diode. But the threshold voltages are much higher and slightly different
for each colour. The reverse breakdown voltages of LEDs are very low,
typically around 5V. So care should be taken that high reverse voltages
do not appear across them.

LEDs that can emit red, yellow, orange, green and blue light are
commercially available. The semiconductor used for fabrication of Visible
LEDs must at least have a band gap of 1.8 eV (spectral range of visible
light is from about 0.4 um to 0.7 pm, i.e., from about 3 eV to 1.8 eV). The
compound semiconductor Gallium Arsenide — Phosphide (GaAsHPx) is
used for making LEDs of different colours. GaAsO_6 P04 (Eg ~ 1.9 eV) is
used for red LED. GaAs (Eg ~ 1.4 eV) is used for making infrared LED.
These LEDs find extensive use in remote controls, burglar alarm systems,
optical communication, etc. Extensive research is being done for
developing white LEDs which can replace incandescent lamps.

LEDs have the following advantages over conventional incandescent
low power lamps:

(i) Low operational voltage and less power.

(ii) Fast action and no warm-up time required.

(iii) The bandwidth of emitted light is 100 A to 500 A or in other words it
is nearly (but not exactly) monochromatic.

(iv) Long life and ruggedness.

(v) Fast on- off switching capability.

2019-20