200 PHYSICS
—

 

POINTS TO PONDER
l .

In considering motion of an object under the gravitational inﬂuence of another object
the following quantities are conserved:

(a) Angular momentum

(b) Total mechanical energy

Linear momentum is not conserved

Angular momentum conservation leads to Kepler‘s second law. However. it is not special
to the inverse square law of gravitation. It holds for any central force.

In Kepler‘s third law [see Eq. [8.1] and T2 = Ks R“. The constant K5 is the same for all
planets in circular orbits. This applies to satellites orbiting the Earth [[Eq. (8.38)].

An astronaut experiences weightlessness in a space satellite. This is not because the
gravitational force is small at that location in space. It is because both the astronaut
and the satellite are in “free fall” towards the Earth.

. The gravitational potential energy associated with two particles separated by a distance

r is given by

Gm1m2
r

The constant can be given any value. The simplest choice is to take it to be zero. With
this choice

V = — + constant

VLM
r

This choice implies that V —> 0 as r —> 00. Choosing location of zero of the gravitational
energy is the same as choosing the arbitrary constant in the potential energy. Note that
the gravitational force is not altered by the choice of this constant.

The total mechanical energy of an object is the sum of its kinetic energy [which is always
positive] and the potential energy. Relative to infinity (i.e. if we presume that the potential
energy of the object at inﬁnity is zero]. the gravitational potential energy of an object is
negative. The total energy of a satellite is negative.

The commonly encountered expression mg h for the potential energy is actually an
approximation to the difference in the gravitational potential energy discussed in the
point 6, above.

Although the gravitational force between two particles is central. the force between two
finite rigid bodies is not necessarily along the line joining their centre of mass. For a
spherically symmetric body however the force on a particle external to the body is as if
the mass is concentrated at the centre and this force is therefore central.

. The gravitational force on a particle inside a spherical shell is zero. However. [unlike a

metallic shell which shields electrical forces) the shell does not shield other bodies outside
it from exerting gravitational forces on a particle inside. Gravitational shielding is not
possible.

EXERCISES

8.1 Answer the following :

(a) You can shield a charge from electrical forces by putting it inside a hollow conductor.
Can you shield a body from the gravitational inﬂuence of nearby matter by putting
it inside a hollow sphere or by some other means ?

(b) An astronaut inside a small space ship orbiting around the earth cannot detect
gravity. If the space station orbiting around the earth has a large size, can he hope
to detect gravity ?

(c) If you compare the gravitational force on the earth due to the sun to that due
to the moon, you would find that the Sun’s pull is greater than the moon’s pull.
[you can check this yourself using the data available in the succeeding exercises).
However, the tidal effect of the moon’s pull is greater than the tidal effect of sun.
Why ?

2019-20