i Physics

1.5 BASIC PROPERTIES OF ELECTRIC CHARGE

We have seen that there are two types of charges, namely positive and
negative and their effects tend to cancel each other. Here, we shall now
describe some other properties of the electric charge.

If the sizes of charged bodies are very small as compared to the
distances between them, we treat them as point charges. All the
charge content of the body is assumed to be concentrated at one point
in space.

1.5.1 Additivity of charges

We have not as yet given a quantitative definition of a charge; we shall
follow it up in the next section. We shall tentatively assume that this can
be done and proceed. If a system contains two point charges q1 and q2,
the total charge of the system is obtained simply by adding algebraically
q1 and q2 , i.e., charges add up like real numbers or they are scalars like
the mass of a body. If a system contains n charges q1, q2, q3, qn, then
the total charge of the system is q1 + q2 + (13 + + qn. Charge has
magnitude but no direction, similar to mass. However, there is one
difference between mass and charge. Mass of a body is always positive
whereas a charge can be either positive or negative. Proper signs have to
be used while adding the charges in a system. For example, the
total charge of a system containing five charges +1, +2, —3, +4 and —5,
in some arbitrary unit, is (+ 1) + (+2) + [—3) + (+4) + [—5) = —l in the
same unit.

1.5.2 Charge is conserved

We have already hinted to the fact that when bodies are charged by
rubbing, there is transfer of electrons from one body to the other; no new
charges are either created or destroyed. A picture of particles of electric
charge enables us to understand the idea of conservation of charge. When
we rub two bodies, what one body gains in charge the other body loses.
Within an isolated system consisting of many charged bodies, due to
interactions among the bodies, charges may get redistributed but it is
found that the total charge of the isolated system is always conserved.
Conservation of charge has been established experimentally.

It is not possible to create or destroy net charge carried by any isolated
system although the charge carrying particles may be created or destroyed
in a process. Sometimes nature creates charged particles: a neutron turns
into a proton and an electron. The proton and electron thus created have
equal and opposite charges and the total charge is zero before and after
the creation.

1.5.3 Quantisation of charge

Experimentally it is established that all free charges are integral multiples
of a basic unit of charge denoted by e. Thus charge q on a body is always
given by

q=ne

2019-20