I Physics

    

Pointer —>

FIGURE 4.24 The moving coil
galvanometer. Its elements are
described in the text. Depending on

Scale

Soft-iron
core

  

coil galvanometer (MCG). It is a device whose principle can be understood
on the basis of our discussion in Section 4.10.

The galvanometer consists of a coil, with many turns, free to rotate
about a fixed axis (Fig. 4.24), in a uniform radial magnetic field. There is
a cylindrical soft iron core which not only makes the ﬁeld radial but also
increases the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld. When a current ﬂows through
the coil, a torque acts on it. This torque is given by Eq. (4.26) to be

17 = N1 AB
where the symbols have their usual meaning. Since the field is radial by
design, we have taken sin 9 = 1 in the above expression for the torque.
The magnetic torque NIAB tends to rotate the coil. A spring SP provides a

counter torque k¢ that balances the magnetic torque NIAB; resulting in a
steady angular deﬂection ¢. In equilibrium

k¢ = NIAB
where k is the torsional constant of the spring; i.e. the restoring torque

per unit twist. The deﬂection ¢ is indicated on the scale by a pointer
attached to the spring. We have

¢ = ($)1 (4.38)

The quantity in brackets is a constant for a given
galvanometer.

The galvanometer can be used in a number of ways.
It can be used as a detector to check if a current is
ﬂowing in the circuit. We have come across this usage
in the Wheatstone’s bridge arrangement. In this usage
the neutral position of the pointer (when no current is
ﬂowing through the galvanometer) is in the middle of
the scale and not at the left end as shown in Fig.4.24.
Depending on the direction of the current, the pointer’s
deﬂection is either to the right or the left.

The galvanometer cannot as such be used as an
ammeter to measure the value of the current in a given
circuit. This is for two reasons: (i) Galvanometer is a
very sensitive device, it gives a full-scale deﬂection for
a current of the order of ,uA. (ii) For measuring
currents, the galvanometer has to be connected in
series, and as it has a large resistance, this will change

Permanent magnet

Uniform radial the value of the current in the circuit. To overcome
magnetic ﬁeld these difficulties, one attaches a small resistance rs,

called shunt resistance, in parallel with
the galvanometer coil; so that most of the current
passes through the shunt. The resistance of this

the requirement. this device can be arrangement is,
used as a current detector or for ~ -
RG rs/ (RG + rs) — rs 1f RG >> rs

measuring the value of the current
(ammeter) or voltage (voltmeter).

164

If rS has small value, in relation to the resistance of
the rest of the circuit Re, the effect of introducing the
measuring instrument is also small and negligible. This

2019-20