l Physics

 

 

9 .-' ‘-. ¢ 6. 5
..-....(} -------- .43 ------- ,.....
""" _.' ..-.""'Q.—. ‘.~--."":7—-.“----‘

9 ': .0 1 :' ‘0

‘-. 4 2. ,- » .3
----- @.m...___. 0-..
--o. ------ r3 . -.-;-- e- ......
:' 9 .0 Q \021; 9
i : 5 58‘ \= ‘.
o '-, 9 156 "6.
. ------ 0-.3 '. ....... 00‘ o
......

(b)

FIGURE 14.8 (a) Trivalent
acceptor atom (In, Al, B etc.)
doped in tetravalent Si or Ge
lattice giving p—type semicon-

ductor. (b) Commonly used
schematic representation of
p—type material which shows

only the fixed core of the
substituent acceptor with
one effective additional
negative charge and its
associated hole.

semiconductor doped with pentavalent impurity, electrons
become the majority carriers and holes the minority carriers.
These semiconductors are, therefore, known as n-type
semiconductors. For n-type semiconductors, we have,

119 >>nh

(ii) p-type semiconductor

(14.3)

This is obtained when Si or Ge is doped with a trivalent impurity
like Al, B, In, etc. The dopant has one valence electron less than
Si or Ge and, therefore, this atom can form covalent bonds with
neighbouring three Si atoms but does not have any electron to
offer to the fourth Si atom. So the bond between the fourth
neighbour and the trivalent atom has a vacancy or hole as shown
in Fig. 14.8. Since the neighbouring Si atom in the lattice wants
an electron in place of a hole, an electron in the outer orbit of
an atom in the neighbourhood may jump to ﬁll this vacancy,
leaving a vacancy or hole at its own site. Thus the hole is
available for conduction. Note that the trivalent foreign atom
becomes effectively negatively charged when it shares fourth
electron with neighbouring Si atom. Therefore, the dopant atom
of p-type material can be treated as core of one negative charge
along with its associated hole as shown in Fig. 14.8(b). It is
obvious that one acceptor atom gives one hole. These holes are
in addition to the intrinsically generated holes while the source
of conduction electrons is only intrinsic generation. Thus, for
such a material, the holes are the majority carriers and electrons
are minority carriers. Therefore, extrinsic semiconductors doped
with trivalent impurity are called p-type semiconductors. For
p-type semiconductors, the recombination process will reduce
the number (ni)of intrinsically generated electrons to ne. We
have, for p-type semiconductors

nh >> ne (14.4)

Note that the crystal maintains an overall charge neutrality
as the charge of additional charge carriers is just equal and
opposite to that of the ionised cores in the lattice.

In extrinsic semiconductors, because of the abundance of
majority current carriers, the minority carriers produced
thermally have more chance of meeting majority carriers and

thus getting destroyed. Hence, the dopant, by adding a large number of
current carriers of one type, which become the majority carriers, indirectly
helps to reduce the intrinsic concentration of minority carriers.

The semiconductor’s energy band structure is affected by doping. In
the case of extrinsic semiconductors, additional energy states due to donor
impurities (ED) and acceptor impurities (E A) also exist. In the energy band
diagram of n-type Si semiconductor, the donor energy level ED is slightly
below the bottom EC of the conduction band and electrons from this level
move into the conduction band with very small supply of energy At room
temperature, most of the donor atoms get ionised but very few (~ 10‘”)
atoms of Si get ionised. So the conduction band will have most electrons
476 coming from the donor impurities, as shown in Fig. 14.9(a). Similarly,

2019-20