98

PHYSICS

 

b Example 5.5 Two identical billiard balls
strike a rigid wall with the same speed but
at different angles. and get reﬂected without
any change in speed. as shown in Fig. 5.6.
What is (i) the direction of the force on the
wall due to each ball? (ii) the ratio of the
magnitudes of impulses imparted to the
balls by the wall ’?

 

(*0 (b)

Fig. 5.6

Answer An instinctive answer to (i) might be
that the force on the wall in case (a) is normal to
the wall, while that in case (b) is inclined at 30°
to the normal. This answer is wrong. The force
on the wall is normal to the wall in both cases.

How to find the force on the wall? The trick is
to consider the force (or impulse) on the ball
due to the wall using the second law, and then
use the third law to answer (i). Let u be the speed
of each ball before and after collision with the
wall, and m the mass of each ball. Choose the x
and y axes as shown in the ﬁgure, and consider
the change in momentum of the ball in each
case :

Case (a)

(px )Inltial = mu (pg )lnltlal = 0

(pX)ﬁna1=_mu (py)ﬁml =0

Impulse is the change in momentum vector.
Therefore,

x—component of impulse = — 2 m u

y-component of impulse = O
Impulse and force are in the same direction.
Clearly, from above, the force on the ball due to
the wall is normal to the wall, along the negative
x-direction. Using Newton’s third law of motion,
the force on the wall due to the ball is normal to
the wall along the positive x-direction. The

2019-20

magnitude of force cannot be ascertained since
the small time taken for the collision has not
been specified in the problem.

Case (b)
(px)initial = mucos 30° , (Py)mm = — Tl'lLl.Sll’1-30o
(px)_/inal = —mucos30°, (py)ﬁm,, = — musin30°

Note, while px changes sign after collision, py
does not. Therefore,

x—component of impulse = —2 m u cos 30°
y-component of impulse = O

The direction of impulse (and force) is the same
as in (a) and is normal to the wall along the
negative x direction. As before, using Newton’s
third law, the force on the wall due to the ball is
normal to the wall along the positive x direction.

The ratio of the magnitudes of the impulses
imparted to the balls in (a) and (b) is

2mu/(2mucos30°)=l~l.2 ‘

J3
5.7 CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM

The second and third laws of motion lead to
an important consequence: the law of
conservation of momentum. Take a familiar
example. A bullet is fired from a gun. If the force
on the bullet by the gun is F, the force on the gun
by the bullet is —F, according to the third law.
The two forces act for a common interval of time
At. According to the second law, F At is the
change in momentum of the bullet and — F At is
the change in momentum of the gun. Since
initially, both are at rest, the change in
momentum equals the final momentum for each.
Thus if pb is the momentum of the bullet after
firing and p9 is the recoil momentum of the gun,
p9 = —pb i.e. pb + p9 = 0. That is, the total
momentum of the (bullet + gun) system is
conserved.

Thus in an isolated system (i.e. a system with
no external force), mutual forces between pairs
of particles in the system can cause momentum
change in individual particles, but since the
mutual forces for each pair are equal and
opposite, the momentum changes cancel in pairs
and the total momentum remains unchanged.
This fact is known as the law of conservation
of momentum :