is not merely of theoretical or academic interest but also
of practical utility. Imagine a world where there is no
electricity — no electric lights, no trains, no telephones and
no personal computers. The pioneering experiments of
Faraday and Henry have led directly to the development
of modern day generators and transformers. Today’s
civilisation owes its progress to a great extent to the
discovery of electromagnetic induction.

6.2 THE EXPERIMENTS OF FARADAY AND
HENRY

The discovery and understanding of electromagnetic
induction are based on a long series of experiments carried
out by Faraday and Henry. We shall now describe some
of these experiments.

Went/went (ll

Figure 6.1 shows a coil C1* connected to a galvanometer
G. When the North-pole of a bar magnet is pushed
towards the coil, the pointer in the galvanometer deﬂects,
indicating the presence of electric current in the coil. The
deﬂection lasts as long as the bar magnet is in motion.
The galvanometer does not show any deﬂection when the
magnet is held stationary. When the magnet is pulled
away from the coil, the galvanometer shows deﬂection in
the opposite direction, which indicates reversal of the
currents direction. Moreover, when the South-pole of
the bar magnet is moved towards or away from the
coil, the deﬂections in the galvanometer are opposite
to that observed with the North-pole for similar
movements. Further, the deﬂection (and hence current)
is found to be larger when the magnet is pushed
towards or pulled away from the coil faster. Instead,
when the bar magnet is held fixed and the coil C1 is
moved towards or away from the magnet, the same
effects are observed. It shows that it is the relative
motion between the magnet and the coil that is
responsible for generation (induction) of electric
current in the coil.

Experiment ()2

In Fig. 6.2 the bar magnet is replaced by a second coil
C2 connected to a battery. The steady current in the
coil C2 produces a steady magnetic field. As coil 02 is

Electromagnetic
Induction

 

Josheph Henry [1797 .—
187 8] American experimental
physicist. professor at
Princeton UniVersity and ﬁrst
director of the Smithsonian
Institution. He made important
improvements in electro-
magnets by winding coils of
insulated wire around iron
pole pieces and invented an
electromagnetic motor and a
new, efficient telegraph. He
disc’overd self-induction and
investigated how currents in
one circuit induce currents in
another.

* Wherever the term ‘coil’ or ‘loop' is used, it is assumed that they are made up of
conducting material and are prepared using wires which are coated with insulating

material.

2019-20

(81.81 - LBLI) AHNEIH HdEISOP

 

 

FIGURE 6.1 When the bar magnet is
pushed towards the coil, the pointer in
the galvanometer G deﬂects.

205