Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits

In digital circuits only two values (represented by O or 1) of the input and
output voltage are permissible.

This section is intended to provide the ﬁrst step in our understanding
of digital electronics. We shall restrict our study to some basic building
blocks of digital electronics (called Logic Gates) which process the digital
signals in a specific manner. Logic gates are used in calculators, digital
watches, computers, robots, industrial control systems, and in
telecommunications.

A light switch in your house can be used as an example of a digital
circuit. The light is either ON or OFF depending on the switch position.
When the light is ON, the output value is ‘1’. When the light is OFF the
output value is ‘0’. The inputs are the position of the light switch. The
switch is placed either in the ON or OFF position to activate the light.

Time

Voltage amplitude
Voltage amphtude

 

(a)
FIGURE 14.27 (a) Analog signal. (b) Digital signal.

14.9.1 Logic gates

A gate is a digital circuit that follows curtain logical relationship A Y
between the input and output voltages. Therefore, they are generally

known as logic gates — gates because they control the ﬂow of (a)

information. The five common logic gates used are NOT, AND, OR,
NAND, NOR. Each logic gate is indicated by a symbol and its function
is defined by a truth table that shows all the possible input logic level
combinations with their respective output logic levels. Truth tables
help understand the behaviour of logic gates. These logic gates can be
realised using semiconductor devices.

(i) NOT gate

This is the most basic gate, with one input and one output. It produces
a ‘1’ output if the input is ‘0’ and vice-versa. That is, it produces an

 

inverted version of the input at its output. This is why it is also known (b)

as an inverter. The commonly used symbol together with the truth FIGURE 14.28

table for this gate is given in Fig. 14.28. (:1) Logic symbol.

(ii) OR Gate (1)] Truth table of
NOT gate.

An OR gate has two or more inputs with one output. The logic symbol
and truth table are shown in Fig. 14.29. The output Y is 1 when either
input A or input B or both are Is, that is, if any of the input is high, the
output is high. 49 1

2019-20