l Physics

 

output. This is what happens in a nuclear reactor. If the chain reaction is
uncontrolled, it leads to explosive energy output, as in a nuclear bomb.

There is, however, a hurdle in sustaining a chain reaction, as described
here. It is known experimentally that slow neutrons (thermal neutrons)
are much more likely to cause fission in 2325U than fast neutrons. Also
fast neutrons liberated in ﬁssion would escape instead of causing another
ﬁssion reaction.

The average energy of a neutron produced in fission of 25’25U is 2 MeV.

These neutrons unless slowed down will escape from the reactor without
interacting with the uranium nuclei, unless a very large amount of
fissionable material is used for sustaining the chain reaction. What one
needs to do is to slow down the fast neutrons by elastic scattering with
light nuclei. In fact, Chadwick’s experiments showed that in an elastic
collision with hydrogen the neutron almost comes to rest and proton
carries away the energy. This is the same situation as when a marble hits
head-on an identical marble at rest. Therefore, in reactors, light nuclei
called moderators are provided along with the fissionable nuclei for slowing
down fast neutrons. The moderators commonly used are water, heavy
water (D20) and graphite. The Apsara reactor at the Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai, uses water as moderator. The other
Indian reactors, which are used for power production, use heavy water
as moderator.

Because of the use of moderator, it is possible that the ratio, K, of
number of fission produced by a given generation of neutrons to the
number of fission of the preceeding generation may be greater than one.
This ratio is called the multiplication factor; it is the measure of the growth
rate of the neutrons in the reactor. For K = 1, the operation of the reactor
is said to be critical, which is what we wish it to be for steady power
operation. If K becomes greater than one, the reaction rate and the reactor
power increases exponentially. Unless the factor K is brought down very
close to unity, the reactor will become supercritical and can even explode.
The explosion of the Chernobyl reactor in Ukraine in 1986 is a sad
reminder that accidents in a nuclear reactor can be catastrophic.

The reaction rate is controlled through control-rods made out of
neutron-absorbing material such as cadmium. In addition to control rods,
reactors are provided with safety rods which, when required, can be
inserted into the reactor and K can be reduced rapidly to less than unity.

The more abundant isotope 2§§U in naturally occurring uranium is

non-fissionable. When it captures a neutron, it produces the highly
radioactive plutonium through these reactions

http://www.npci|.nic.in/main/AllProjectOperati0nDisp|ay.aspx

Nuclear power plants in India

,A x
«x,
.. w

2
‘~ 1.2% ‘,
tn

 

238 239 239 — —
92U+na 9,te 93Np+e +V

2fﬁNp a2§§Pu+e‘+1—/ (13-29)

Plutonium undergoes fission with slow neutrons.

Figure 13.5 shows the schematic diagram of a nuclear reactor based
454 on thermal neutron fission. The core of the reactor is the site of nuclear

2019-20