390

 

18. The Doppler effect is a change in the observed frequency of a wave when the source (S)
or the observer (0) or both move[s) relative to the medium. For sound the observed
frequency v is given in terms of the source frequency v0 by

0+1}
0

V = V —
0 v + v

s
here u is the speed of sound through the medium, Do is the velocity of observer relative
to the medium, and us is the source velocity relative to the medium. In using this
formula, velocities in the direction OS should be treated as positive and those opposite

to it should be taken to be negative.

5...... —m
,1 [L] m

    
   
         
     
     

Remarks

     

Physical quantity

Wavelength Distance between two consecutive
points with the same phase.

Propagation k [L'l] III—1 k = E

constant 1

Wave speed v [LT—1] m s"1 v = VA

Beat frequency vb”, [T‘ 1] 5‘1 Difference of two close frequencies

of super - osin;

POINTS TO PONDER

l. A wave is not motion of matter as a whole in a medium. A wind is different from the
sound wave in air. The former involves motion of air from one place to the other. The
latter involves compressions and rarefactions of layers of air.

In a wave. emery and not the matter Is transferred from one point to the other.

In a mechanical wave. energy transfer takes place because of the coupling through
elastic forces between neighbouring oscillating parts of the medium.

Transverse waves can propagate only in medium with shear modulus of elasticity.
Longitudinal waves need bulk modulus of elasticity and are therefore. possible in all
media, solids. liquids and gases.

In a harmonic progressive wave of a given frequency. all particles have the same
amplitude but different phases at a given instant of time. In a stationary wave. all
particles between two nodes have the same phase at a given instant but have different
amplitudes.

Relative to an observer at rest in a medium the speed of a mechanical wave in that
medium (1)) depends only on elastic and other properties [such as mass density) of
the medium. It does not depend on the velocity of the source.

For an observer moving with velocity I.)0 relative to the medium. the speed of a wave is
obviously different from u and is given by v i 00.

2019-20

PHYSICS