MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE

POINTS TO PONDER

l.

3.1

3.2

The path length traversed by an object between two points is. in general, not the same
as the magnitude of displacement. The displacement depends only on the end points:
the path length (as the name implies) depends on the actual path. In one dimension.
the two quantities are equal only if the object does not change its direction during the
course of motion. In all other cases. the path length is greater than the magnitude of
displacement.

In view of point I above. the average speed of an object is greater than or equal to the
magnitude of the average velocity over a given time interval. The two are equal only if
the path length is equal to the magnitude of displacement.

The origin and the positive direction of an axis are a matter of choice. You should first
specify this choice before you assign signs to quantities like displacement. velocity
and acceleration.

If a particle is speeding up. acceleration is in the direction of velocity: if its speed is
decreasing. acceleration is in the direction opposite to that of the velocity. This
statement is independent of the choice of the origin and the axis.

The sign of acceleration does not tell us whether the particle's speed is increasing or
decreasing. The sign of acceleration (as mentioned in point 3) depends on the choice
of the positive direction of the axis. For example. if the vertically upward direction is
chosen to be the positive direction of the axis, the acceleration due to gravity is
negative. If a particle is falling under gravity. this acceleration. though negative.
results in increase in speed. For a particle thrown upward. the same negative
acceleration [of gravity) results in decrease in speed.

The zero velocity of a particle at any instant does not necessarily imply zero acceleration
at that instant. A particle may be momentarily at rest and yet have non—zero
acceleration. For example. a particle thrown up has zero velocity at its uppermost
point but the acceleration at that instant continues to be the acceleration due to
gravity.

In the kinematic equations of motion [Eq. (3.1 1]]. the various quantities are algebraic,
i.e. they may be positive or negative. The equations are applicable in all situations
[for one dimensional motion with constant acceleration) provided the values of different
quantities are substituted in the equations with proper signs.

The definitions of instantaneous velocity and acceleration [Eqs. (3.3) and (3.5)] are
exact and are always correct while the kinematic equations [Eq. [3. l 1]) are true only
for motion in which the magnitude and the direction of acceleration are constant
during the course of motion.

 

EXERCISES

In which of the following examples of motion, can the body be considered
approximately a point object:

(a) a railway carriage moving without jerks between two stations.

(b) a monkey sitting on top of a man cycling smoothly on a circular track.

(c) a spinning cricket ball that turns sharply on hitting the ground.

[(1) a tumbling beaker that has slipped off the edge of a table.

The position-time (x—t) graphs for two children A and B returning from their school
0 to their homes P and Q respectively are shown in Fig. 3.19. Choose the correct
entries in the brackets below ;

(a) (A/ B) lives closer to the school than [B/A)

(b) [A/ B) starts from the school earlier than (B/A)

(c) (A/ B) walks faster than (B/A)

(d) A and B reach home at the (same / different) time

(e) (A/ B) overtakes (B/A) on the road [once/twice).

2019-20

55