the south magnetic pole. There is some confusion in the
nomenclature of the poles. If one looks at the magnetic
ﬁeld lines of the earth (Fig. 5.8), one sees that unlike in the
case of a bar magnet, the ﬁeld lines go into the earth at the
north magnetic pole (Nm) and come out from the south
magnetic pole (Sm). The convention arose because the
magnetic north was the direction to which the north
pole of a magnetic needle pointed; the north pole of
a magnet was so named as it was the north seeking
pole. Thus, in reality, the north magnetic pole behaves

FIGURE 5.8 The earth as a giant like the south pole of a bar magnet inside the earth and
magnetic dipole. viceversa.

EXAMPLE 5.8

Example 5.8 The earth’s magnetic field at the equator is approximately
0.4 G. Estimate the earth’s dipole moment.

Solution From Eq. (5.7), the equatorial magnetic ﬁeld is,

,u m
BE = 41(tr3
We are given that BE ~ 0.4 G = 4 X 10*3 T. For r, we take the radius of
the earth 6.4 X 106 m. Hence,
_4><10*5 ><(6.4><106)3
— #0 / 47‘

 

m =4 x 102x (6.4 x 10“)3 (yo/41: = 10—7)

= 1.05 x 1023A m2
This is close to the value 8 X 1022 A m2 quoted in geomagnetic texts.

5.4. 1 Magnetic declination and dip

Consider a point on the earth’s surface. At such a point, the direction of
the longitude circle determines the geographic north-south direction, the
line of longitude towards the north pole being the direction of

True North true north. The vertical plane containing the longitude circle

 

and the axis of rotation of the earth is called the geographic
meridian. In a similar way, one can deﬁne magnetic meridian
of a place as the vertical plane which passes through the
imaginary line joining the magnetic north and the south poles.
This plane would intersect the surface of the earth in a
longitude like circle. A magnetic needle, which is free to swing
horizontally, would then lie in the magnetic meridian and the
north pole of the needle would point towards the magnetic
north pole. Since the line joining the magnetic poles is titled
with respect to the geographic axis of the earth, the magnetic
meridian at a point makes angle with the geographic meridian.

FIGURE 5_9 A magnetic needle This, then, is the angle between the true geographic north and
free to move in horizontal plane the north shown by a compass needle. This angle is called the
points toward the magnetic magnetic declination or simply declination (Fig. 5.9).

186

north~south
direction.

The declination is greater at higher latitudes and smaller
near the equator. The declination in India is small, it being

2019-20