174

PHYSICS

which is in contact with the surface is at rest
on the surface.

We have remarked earlier that rolling motion
is a combination of rotation and translation. We
know that the translational motion of a system
of particles is the motion of its centre of mass.

 

Fig. 7.37 The rolling motion (without slipping) of a
disc on a level surface. Note at any instant,
the point of contact P0 of the disc with the
surface is at rest; the centre of mass of
the disc moves with velocity, vcm. The disc
rotates with angular velocity 6:; about its
axis which passes through C; vcm =Rw,
where R is the radius of the disc.

Let ch be the velocity of the centre of mass
and therefore the translational velocity of the
disc. Since the centre of mass of the rolling disc
is at its geometric centre C (Fig. 7. 37), vcm is
the velocity of C. It is parallel to the level
surface. The rotational motion of the disc is
about its symmetry axis, which passes through
C. Thus, the velocity of any point of the disc,
like P0, P1 or P2, consists of two parts, one is the
translational velocity ch and the other is the
linear velocity vr on account of rotation. The
magnitude of VT is Dr: M), where wis the angular
velocity of the rotation of the disc about the axis
and r is the distance of the point from the axis
(i.e. from C). The velocity vr is directed
perpendicular to the radius vector of the given
point with respect to C. In Fig. 7 .37 , the velocity
of the point P2 (v2) and its components vrand
vcmare shown; vrhere is perpendicular to CP2 .
It is easy to show that vZ is perpendicular to the
line POPZ. Therefore the line passing through PO
and parallel to a) is called the instantaneous axis
of rotation.

2019-20

At Po, the linear velocity, vr, due to rotation
is directed exactly opposite to the translational
velocity ch- Further the magnitude of vrhere is
Ra), where R is the radius of the disc. The
condition that P0 is instantaneously at rest
requires um = Ra). Thus for the disc the condition
for rolling without slipping is

vcm = R0) (7.47)

Incidentally, this means that the velocity of
point P1 at the top of the disc (v1) has a
magnitude vcm+ Ra) or 2 v6m and is directed
parallel to the level surface. The condition (7 .47)
applies to all rolling bodies.

7.14. 1 Kinetic Energy of Rolling Motion

Our next task will be to obtain an expression
for the kinetic energy of a rolling body. The
kinetic energy of a rolling body can be separated
into kinetic energy of translation and kinetic
energy of rotation. This is a special case of a
general result for a system of particles,
according to which the kinetic energy of a
system of particles (K) can be separated into
the kinetic energy of translational motion of the
centre of mass (MW/2) and kinetic energy of
rotational motion about the centre of mass of
the system of particles (K’). Thus,

K=K’+ MV2 /2 (7.48)

We assume this general result (see Exercise
7.3 1), and apply it to the case of rolling motion.
In our notation, the kinetic energy of the centre
of mass, i.e., the kinetic energy of translation,
of the rolling body is mvzcm / 2, where m is the
mass of the body and vcm is the centre of the
mass velocity. Since the motion of the rolling
body about the centre of mass is rotation, K’
represents the kinetic energy of rotation of the
body; K’=I(o2/2 , where I is the moment of
inertia about the appropriate axis, which is the
symmetry axis of the rolling body. The kinetic
energy of a rolling body, therefore, is given by

1 2 1 2
K:— 10) + —m1)
2 2 cm (7.493)

Substituting I = mk2 where k = the
corresponding radius of gyration of the body
and um: R 03, we get

1 k2
or K = 5m03m[1+—] (7.4913)