i Physics
6.8

 

 

EDDY CURRENTS

So far we have studied the electric currents induced in well deﬁned paths
in conductors like circular loops. Even when bulk pieces of conductors

 

are subjected to changing magnetic ﬂux, induced currents
are produced in them. However, their ﬂow patterns resemble
swirling eddies in water. This effect was discovered by physicist
Foucault (18 19- 1868) and these currents are called eddy
currents.

Consider the apparatus shown in Fig. 6. l 3. A copper plate
is allowed to swing like a simple pendulum between the pole
pieces of a strong magnet. It is found that the motion is damped
and in a little while the plate comes to a halt in the magnetic
field. We can explain this phenomenon on the basis of
electromagnetic induction. Magnetic ﬂux associated with the
plate keeps on changing as the plate moves in and out of the
region between magnetic poles. The ﬂux change induces eddy
currents in the plate. Directions of eddy currents are opposite
when the plate swings into the region between the poles and
when it swings out of the region.

If rectangular slots are made in the copper plate as shown

FIGURE 6. 13 Eddy currents are in Fig. 6.14, area available to the ﬂow of eddy currents is less.

generated in the copper plate.
while entering
and leaving the region of
magnetic field.

 

FIGURE 6.14 Cutting slots
in the copper plate reduces
the effect of eddy currents.

218

Thus, the pendulum plate with holes or slots reduces
electromagnetic damping and the plate swings more freely.
Note that magnetic moments of the induced currents (which
oppose the motion) depend upon the area enclosed by the
currents (recall equation m = IA in Chapter 4).

This fact is helpful in reducing eddy currents in the metallic
cores of transformers, electric motors and other such devices in
which a coil is to be wound over metallic core. Eddy currents are
undesirable since they heat up the core and dissipate electrical
energy in the form of heat. Eddy currents are minimised by using
laminations of metal to make a metal core. The laminations are
separated by an insulating material like lacquer. The plane of the
laminations must be arranged parallel to the magnetic field, so
that they cut across the eddy current paths. This arrangement
reduces the strength of the eddy currents. Since the dissipation
of electrical energy into heat depends on the square of the strength
of electric current, heat loss is substantially reduced.

Eddy currents are used to advantage in certain applications like:

(i) Magnetic braking in trains: Strong electromagnets are situated
above the rails in some electrically powered trains. When the
electromagnets are activated, the eddy currents induced in the
rails oppose the motion of the train. As there are no mechanical
linkages, the braking effect is smooth.

(ii) Electromagnetic damping: Certain galvanometers have a fixed
core made of nonmagnetic metallic material. When the coil
oscillates, the eddy currents generated in the core oppose the
motion and bring the coil to rest quickly.

2019-20