106

PHYSICS

 

method in solved examples. To handle a typical
problem in mechanics systematically, one
should use the following steps :

(1)

Draw a diagram showing schematically the
various parts of the assembly of bodies, the
links, supports, etc.

(ii) Choose a convenient part of the assembly

as one system.

(iii) Draw a separate diagram which shows this

system and all the forces on the system by
the remaining part of the assembly. Include
also the forces on the system by other
agencies. Do not include the forces on the
environment by the system. A diagram of

the net force on the block must be zero i.e.,
R = 20 N. Using third law the action of the
block (i.e. the force exerted on the ﬂoor by
the block) is equal to 20 N and directed
vertically downwards.

(b) The system (block + cylinder) accelerates

downwards with 0.1 m s2. The free-body
diagram of the system shows two forces on
the system : the force of gravity due to the
earth (270 N); and the normal force R’ by the
ﬂoor. Note, the free-body diagram of the
system does not show the internal forces
between the block and the cylinder. Applying
the second law to the system,

this type is known as ‘a free-body diagram’.
(Note this does not imply that the system
under consideration is without a net force).
(iv) In a free-body diagram, include information R
about forces (their magnitudes and
directions) that are either given or you are u
sure of (e.g., the direction of tension in a
20 N
Free-body diagram
of the block

270 — R’ = 27 X 0.1N
16. R’ = 267.3 N

string along its length). The rest should be
treated as unknowns to be determined using
laws of motion.

(v) If necessary, follow the same procedure for
another choice of the system. In doing so, "'I R'
employ Newton’s third law. That is, if in the I
free-body diagram of A, the force on A due to
B is shown as F, then in the free-body
diagram of B, the force on B due to A should

 
 

 

be shown as —F. 270 N
The following example illustrates the above X gfigebgﬁilgfiarirnder
procedure. 5 stem
0.1 m 5'2 y
F Example 5.12 See Fig. 5.15. A wooden Fig. 515

block of mass 2 kg rests on a soft horizontal
ﬂoor. When an iron cylinder of mass 25 kg
is placed on top of the block. the ﬂoor yields
steadily and the block and the cylinder
together go down with an acceleration of
0.1 m 5‘2. What is the action of the block
on the ﬂoor (a) before and (b) after the ﬂoor
yields ? Take 9 = 10 m 5‘2. Identify the
action—reaction pairs in the problem.

By the third law, the action of the system on
the ﬂoor is equal to 267 .3 N vertically downward.

Action-reaction pairs

For (a): (i) the force of gravity (20 N) on the block
by the earth (say, action); the force of
gravity on the earth by the block
(reaction) equal to 20 N directed
upwards (not shown in the figure).

(ii) the force on the ﬂoor by the block
Answer (action); the force on the block by the
(a) The block is at rest on the ﬂoor. Its free-body ﬂoor (reaction).

diagram shows two forces on the block, the For (b): (i) the force of gravity (270 N) on the
force of gravitational attraction by the earth system by the earth (say, action); the
equal to 2 x 10 = 20 N; and the normal force force of gravity on the earth by the
R of the ﬂoor on the block. By the First Law, system (reaction), equal to 270 N,

 

 

2019-20