Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

changes at the interface of the two media. This (1) Normal

phenomenon is called refraction of light. Snell

experimentally obtained the following laws of Incident ray
refraction:

(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the
normal to the interface at the point of
incidence, all lie in the same plane.

(ii) The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence
to the sine of angle of refraction is constant.
Remember that the angles of incidence (i) and
refraction (r) are the angles that the incident
and its refracted ray make with the normal,
respectively. We have

Reﬂected ray

)
D
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
o
:
1
b
o
l
1
l
t
I

Reﬂecting
surface

 

Refracted ray

 

= rt21 (9, 10) FIGURE 9.8 Refraction and reﬂection of light.

where n21 is a constant, called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first medium. Equation (9. 10) is the well-known Snell’s
law of refraction. We note that n21 is a characteristic of the pair of media
(and also depends on the wavelength of light), but is independent of the
angle of incidence.

From Eq. (9.10), if n21 > 1, r< i, i.e., the refracted ray bends towards
the normal. In such a case medium 2 is said to be optically denser (or
denser, in short) than medium 1. On the other hand, if n21 <1, r > i, the
refracted ray bends away from the normal. This is the case when incident
ray in a denser medium refracts into a rarer medium.

Note: Optical density should not be confused with mass density,
which is mass per unit volume. It is possible that mass density of
an optically denser medium may be less than that of an optically
rarer medium (optical density is the ratio of the speed of light in
two media). For example, turpentine and water. Mass density of
turpentine is less than that of water but its optical density is higher

If n21 is the refractive index of medium 2
with respect to medium 1 and n12 the refractive
index of medium 1 with respect to medium 2,
then it should be clear that

”12 :— (9.11)

It also follows that if n32 is the refractive
index of medium 3 with respect to medium 2
then n32 = n31 X n12, where n31 is the refractive
index of medium 3 with respect to medium 1.

Some elementary results based on the laws FIGURE 9.9 Lateral Shift Of a ray refracted
of refraction follow immediately. For a through a ParaIIEI‘SidEd Slab-
rectangular slab, refraction takes place at two
interfaces (air-glass and glass-air). It is easily seen from Fig. 9.9 that
r2 = i1, i.e., the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray—there is no 317

 

2019-20