l Physics

 

Incidcni
l'lui Icwaivc

Z,

Incident
plant-wave

[a]

discussed in detail in Chapter 9 on the basis of rectilinear propagation of
light. Here we just describe the behaviour of the wavefronts as they
undergo reﬂection or refraction. In Fig. 10.7(a) we consider a plane wave
passing through a thin prism. Clearly, since the speed of light waves is
less in glass, the lower portion of the incoming wavefront (which travels
through the greatest thickness of glass) will get delayed resulting in a tilt
in the emerging wavefront as shown in the figure. In Fig. l 0.7(b) we
consider a plane wave incident on a thin convex lens; the central part of
the incident plane wave traverses the thickest portion of the lens and is
delayed the most. The emerging wavefront has a depression at the centre
and therefore the wavefront becomes spherical and converges to the point
F which is known as the focus. In Fig. 10.7(c) a plane wave is incident on
a concave mirror and on reﬂection we have a spherical wave converging
to the focal point F. In a similar manner, we can understand refraction
and reﬂection by concave lenses and convex mirrors.

Concave mirror
. of radius R

  

I I1(‘l(l{'.‘1]l

. i'-‘ pluncwuvc

‘1,

 

Spherical wavefront Spherical wavefront
m‘ mqu f 01‘ radius R/2

. ‘ (C)

[11]

FIGURE 10.7 Refraction of a plane wave by (a) a thin pn'sm. (b) a convex lens. (c) Reﬂection of a

358

plane wave by a concave mirror.

From the above discussion it follows that the total time taken from a
point on the object to the corresponding point on the image is the same
measured along any ray. For example, when a convex lens focusses light
to form a real image, although the ray going through the centre traverses
a shorter path, but because of the slower speed in glass, the time taken
is the same as for rays travelling near the edge of the lens.

10.3.4 The doppler effect

We should mention here that one should be careful in constructing the
wavefronts if the source (or the observer) is moving. For example, if there
is no medium and the source moves away from the observer, then later
wavefronts have to travel a greater distance to reach the observer and
hence take a longer time. The time taken between the arrival of two
successive wavefronts is hence longer at the observer than it is at the
source. Thus, when the source moves away from the observer the
frequency as measured by the source will be smaller. This is known as
the Doppler effect. Astronomers call the increase in wavelength due to
doppler effect as red shift since a wavelength in the middle of the visible
region of the spectrum moves towards the red end of the spectrum. When
waves are received from a source moving towards the observer, there is
an apparent decrease in wavelength, this is referred to as blue shift.

2019-20