Wave Optics

slit diffraction pattern on the screen. The centre of the central bright fringe

will appear at a point which lies on the straight line SS1 or SS2, as the

case may be.

We now compare and contrast the interference pattern with that seen
for a coherently illuminated single slit (usually called the single slit
diffraction pattern).

(i) The interference pattern has a number of equally spaced bright and
dark bands. The diffraction pattern has a central bright maximum
which is twice as wide as the other maxima. The intensity falls as we
go to successive maxima away from the centre, on either side.

(ii) We calculate the interference pattern by superposing two waves
originating from the two narrow slits. The diffraction pattern is a
superposition of a continuous family of waves originating from each
point on a single slit.

(iii) For a single slit of width a, the first null of the interference pattern
occurs at an angle of l/ a. At the same angle of l/ a, we get a maximum
(not a null) for two narrow slits separated by a distance a.

One must understand that both d and a have to be quite small, to be
able to observe good interference and diffraction patterns. For example,
the separation 01 between the two slits must be of the order of a milimetre
or so. The width a of each slit must be even smaller, of the order of 0.1 or
0.2 mm.

In our discussion of Young’s experiment and the single-slit diffraction,
we have assumed that the screen on which the fringes are formed is at a
large distance. The two or more paths from the slits to the screen were
treated as parallel. This situation also occurs when we place a converging
lens after the slits and place the screen at the focus. Parallel paths from
the slit are combined at a single point on the screen. Note that the lens
does not introduce any extra path dtﬁerences in a parallel beam. This
arrangement is often used since it gives more intensity than placing the
screen far away. If f is the focal length of the lens, then we can easily work
out the size of the central bright maximum. In terms of angles, the
separation of the central maximum from the ﬁrst null of the diffraction
pattern is A/ a. Hence, the size on the screen will be f A / a.

10.6.2 Seeing the single slit diffraction pattern

It is surprisingly easy to see the single-slit diffraction pattern for oneself.
The equipment needed can be found in most homes — two razor blades
and one clear glass electric bulb preferably with a straight filament. One
has to hold the two blades so that the edges are parallel and have a
narrow slit in between. This is easily done with the thumb and forefmgers
(Fig. 10.18).

Keep the slit parallel to the filament, right in front of the eye. Use
spectacles if you normally do. With slight adjustment of the width of the
slit and the parallelism of the edges, the pattern should be seen with its
bright and dark bands. Since the position of all the bands (except the
central one) depends on wavelength, they will show some colours. Using
a filter for red or blue will make the fringes clearer. With both filters
available, the wider fringes for red compared to blue can be seen.

2019-20

W

W

FIGURE 10.18
Holding two blades to
form a single slit. A
bulb filament viewed
through this shows

clear diffraction
bands.

371