l Physics

(ii) Diamond: Diamonds are known for their
spectacular brilliance. Their brilliance
is mainly due to the total internal
reﬂection of light inside them. The critical
angle for diamond-air interface (E 24.4°)
is very small, therefore once light enters
a diamond, it is very likely to undergo
total internal reﬂection inside it.
Diamonds found in nature rarely exhibit
the brilliance for which they are known.
It is the technical skill of a diamond
cutter which makes diamonds to
sparkle so brilliantly. By cutting the
diamond suitably, multiple total
internal reflections can be made

 

 

to occur.
(iii) Prism: Prisms designed to bend light by
FIGURE 9.15 Prisms designed to bend rays by 90° or by 180° make use oftotal internal
90° and 180° or to invert image without changing reﬂection [Fig 915(3) and (b)] Such a
its size make. use of total internal reﬂection. prism is also used to invert images

without changing their size [Fig 9. 15(0)].

In the first two cases, the critical angle is for the material of the prism

must be less than 45°. We see from Table 9.1 that this is true for both

crown glass and dense ﬂint glass.

(iv) Optical ﬁbres: Nowadays optical fibres are extensively used for
transmitting audio and video signals through long distances. Optical
ﬁbres too make use of the phenomenon of total internal reﬂection.
Optical ﬁbres are fabricated with high quality composite glass / quartz
ﬁbres. Each fibre consists of a core and cladding. The refractive index
of the material of the core is higher than that of the cladding.

When a signal in the form of light is
Low n directed at one end of the fibre at a suitable
\ angle, it undergoes repeated total internal
reﬂections along the length of the fibre and
finally comes out at the other end (Fig. 9.16).
Since light undergoes total internal reﬂection
High n at each stage, there is no appreciable loss in
the intensity of the light signal. Optical fibres
FIGURE 9. 16 Light undergoes successive total are fabricated such that light reﬂected at one
internal reﬂections as it moves through an side Of inner surface strikes the other at an
Optlcal hbre' angle larger than the critical angle. Even if the
fibre is bent, light can easily travel along its
length. Thus, an optical fibre can be used to act as an optical pipe.

A bundle of optical fibres can be put to several uses. Optical fibres
are extensively used for transmitting and receiving electrical signals which
are converted to light by suitable transducers. Obviously, optical fibres
can also be used for transmission of optical signals. For example, these
are used as a ‘light pipe’ to facilitate visual examination of internal organs

322 like esophagus, stomach and intestines. You might have seen a commonly

2019-20