i Physics

and V(B) respectively. Since current is ﬂowing from A to B, WA) > V(B)
and the potential difference across AB is V: V(A) — V(B) > O.
In a time interval At, an amount of charge AQ = I At travels from A to
B. The potential energy of the charge at A, by definition, was Q WA) and
similarly at B, it is Q V(B). Thus, change in its potential energy AUpot is
AUpot = Final potential energy — Initial potential energy
= AQ[(V(B) - V(AH = -AQ V
= —I VAt < O (3.28)
If charges moved without collisions through the conductor, their
kinetic energy would also change so that the total energy is unchanged.
Conservation of total energy would then imply that,

AK= —AUPot (3.29)
that is,
AK = I VAt > O (3.30)

Thus, in case charges were moving freely through the conductor under
the action of electric field, their kinetic energy would increase as they
move. We have, however, seen earlier that on the average, charge carriers
do not move with acceleration but with a steady drift velocity. This is
because of the collisions with ions and atoms during transit. During
collisions, the energy gained by the charges thus is shared with the atoms.
The atoms vibrate more vigorously, i.e., the conductor heats up. Thus,
in an actual conductor, an amount of energy dissipated as heat in the
conductor during the time interval At is,

AW= IVAt (3.31)

The energy dissipated per unit time is the power dissipated
P = AW/At and we have,

P = I V (3.32)
Using Ohm’s law V = IR, we get
P= 12R: V2/R (3.33)

as the power loss (“ohmic loss”) in a conductor of resistance R carrying a
current I. It is this power which heats up, for example, the coil of an
electric bulb to incandescence, radiating out heat and

Positive Negative hght
elecm’de eleCtrOde Where does the power come from? As we have
R reasoned before, we need an external source to keep
E1 a steady current through the conductor. It is clearly
ectrolyte . , ,
this source Wthh must supply this power. In the
simple circuit shown with a cell (Fig.3.12), it is the
chemical energy of the cell which supplies this power
for as long as it can.
FIGURE 3_12 Heat is produced in the The expressions for power, Eqs. (3.32) and (3.33),
resistor R which is connected across show the dependence of the power dissipated in a
the tCI’IIliIlalS of a cell. The energy resistor R on the current through it and the voltage
dissipated in the resistor R comes from across it,
the Chemical energy 0f the dedmlyte- Equation (3.33) has an important application to
106 power transmission. Electrical power is transmitted

from power stations to homes and factories, which

2019-20