Electric Charges
and Fields

1. 15 APPLICATIONS OF GAUss’s LAW

The electric ﬁeld due to a general charge distribution is, as seen above,
given by Eq. (1.27). In practice, except for some special cases, the
summation (or integration) involved in this equation cannot be carried

out to give electric ﬁeld at every point in
space. For some symmetric charge
configurations, however, it is possible to
obtain the electric ﬁeld in a simple way using
the Gauss’s law. This is best understood by
some examples.

1.15.1 Field due to an inﬁnitely
long straight uniformly
charged wire

Consider an inﬁnitely long thin straight wire
with uniform linear charge density 2.. The wire
is obviously an axis of symmetry. Suppose we
take the radial vector from O to P and rotate it
around the wire. The points P, P’, P” so
obtained are completely equivalent with
respect to the charged wire. This implies that
the electric ﬁeld must have the same magnitude
at these points. The direction of electric ﬁeld at
every point must be radial (outward if A > O,
inward if A < O). This is clear from Fig. 1.29.

Consider a pair of line elements P1 and P2
of the wire, as shown. The electric ﬁelds
produced by the two elements of the pair when
summed give a resultant electric field which
is radial (the components normal to the radial
vector cancel). This is true for any such pair
and hence the total ﬁeld at any point P is
radial. Finally, since the wire is infinite,
electric ﬁeld does not depend on the position
of P along the length of the wire. In short, the
electric ﬁeld is everywhere radial in the plane
cutting the wire normally, and its magnitude
depends only on the radial distance r.

To calculate the ﬁeld, imagine a cylindrical
Gaussian surface, as shown in the Fig. l .29(b).
Since the field is everywhere radial, ﬂux
through the two ends of the cylindrical
Gaussian surface is zero. At the cylindrical
part of the surface, E is normal to the surface
at every point, and its magnitude is constant,
since it depends only on r. The surface area
of the curved part is 2n rL where lis the length
of the cylinder.

 

(b)

FIGURE 1.29 (a) Electric field due to an

infinitely long thin straight wire is radial.
(b) The Gaussian surface for a long thin
wire of uniform linear charge density.

37

2019-20