lOO

PHYSICS

 

Answer Figures 5.8(b) and 5.8(c) are known as
free-body diagrams. Figure 5.8(b) is the free-body
diagram of W and Fig. 5.8(c) is the free-body
diagram of point P.

Consider the equilibrium of the weight W.
Clearly,T2 = 6 X 10 = 60 N.

Consider the equilibrium of the point P under
the action of three forces - the tensions T1 and
T2, and the horizontal force 50 N. The horizontal
and vertical components of the resultant force
must vanish separately :

Tlcos0= T2 = SON
T sin 0 = 50 N

1

which gives that

tan0 = E or 6 = tan"1 (5) = 40°
6 6
Note the answer does not depend on the length

of the rope (assumed massless) nor on the point
at which the horizontal force is applied. 4

5.9 COMMON FORCES IN MECHANICS

In mechanics, we encounter several kinds of
forces. The gravitational force is, of course,
pervasive. Every object on the earth experiences
the force of gravity due to the earth. Gravity also
governs the motion of celestial bodies. The
gravitational force can act at a distance without
the need of any intervening medium.

All the other forces common in mechanics are
contact forcesf'< As the name suggests, a contact
force on an object arises due to contact with some
other object: solid or ﬂuid. When bodies are in
contact (e. g. a book resting on a table, a system
of rigid bodies connected by rods, hinges and

kx

 

mg

other types of supports), there are mutual
contact forces (for each pair of bodies) satisfying
the third law. The component of contact force
normal to the surfaces in contact is called
normal reaction. The component parallel to the
surfaces in contact is called friction. Contact
forces arise also when solids are in contact with
ﬂuids. For example, for a solid immersed in a
ﬂuid, there is an upward bouyant force equal to
the weight of the ﬂuid displaced. The viscous
force, air resistance, etc are also examples of
contact forces (Fig. 5.9).

Two other common forces are tension in a
string and the force due to spring. When a spring
is compressed or extended by an external force,
a restoring force is generated. This force is
usually proportional to the compression or
elongation (for small displacements). The spring
force F is written as F = — k x where x is the
displacement and k is the force constant. The
negative sign denotes that the force is opposite
to the displacement from the unstretched state.
For an inextensible string, the force constant is
very high. The restoring force in a string is called
tension. It is customary to use a constant tension
Tthroughout the string. This assumption is true
for a string of negligible mass.

In Chapter 1, we learnt that there are four
fundamental forces in nature. Of these, the weak
and strong forces appear in domains that do not
concern us here. Only the gravitational and
electrical forces are relevant in the context of
mechanics. The different contact forces of
mechanics mentioned above fundamentally arise
from electrical forces. This may seem surprising

 

Fig. 5.9 Some examples of contact forces in mechanics.

* We are not considering, for simplicity, charged and magnetic bodies. For these, besides gravity, there are

electrical and magnetic non—contact forces.

2019-20