262

PHYSICS

Aerofoil or lift on aircraft wing: Figure 10.13
(c) shows an aerofoil, which is a solid piece
shaped to provide an upward dynamic lift when
it moves horizontally through air. The cross-
section of the wings of an aeroplane looks
somewhat like the aerofoil shown in Fig. 10.13 (c)
with streamlines around it. When the aerofoil
moves against the wind, the orientation of the
wing relative to ﬂow direction causes the
streamlines to crowd together above the wing
more than those below it. The ﬂow speed on top
is higher than that below it. There is an upward
force resulting in a dynamic lift of the wings and
this balances the weight of the plane. The
following example illustrates this.

Example 1 0.8 A fully loaded Boeing
aircraft has a mass of 3.3 x 105 kg. Its total
wing area is 500 n12. It is in level ﬂight with
a speed of 960 km/h. (a) Estimate the
pressure difference between the lower and

upper surfaces of the wings (b) Estimate
the fractional increase in the speed of the
air on the upper surface of the wing relative
to the lower surface. [The density of air is p
= 1.2 kg m’“]

 

Answer (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is
balanced by the upward force due to the
pressure difference

APXA=3.3 x 105ng 9.8
Ap= (3.3x 105 kg>< 9.8mS'2) / 500 m2

= 6.5 X 103 Nm‘2

(b) We ignore the small height difference
between the top and bottom sides in Eq. (10. 12).
The pressure difference between them is
then

AP=§<U§ —v12)

where U2 is the speed of air over the upper
surface and U1 is the speed under the bottom
surface.

2019-20

Taking the average speed
Dav = (v2+ v1)/2 = 960 km/h = 267 m s1,

we have

 

AP
1) — v v 2 ~
( 2 l)/ av pviv—v 0.08
The speed above the wing needs to be only 8
% higher than that below. 4

10.5 VISCOSITY

Most of the ﬂuids are not ideal ones and offer some
resistance to motion. This resistance to ﬂuid motion
is like an intemal friction analogous to ﬁ'iction when
a solid moves on a surface. It is called viscosity.
This force exists when there is relative motion
between layers of the liquid. Suppose we consider
a ﬂuid like oil enclosed between two glass plates
as shown in Fig. 1 O. 14 (a). The bottom plate is ﬁxed
while the top plate is moved with a constant
velocity v relative to the fixed plate. If oil is
replaced by honey, a greater force is required to
move the plate with the same velocity. Hence
we say that honey is more viscous than oil. The
ﬂuid in contact with a surface has the same
velocity as that of the surfaces. Hence, the layer
of the liquid in contact with top surface moves
with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in
contact with the fixed surface is stationary. The
velocities of layers increase uniformly from
bottom (zero velocity) to the top layer (velocity
v). For any layer of liquid, its upper layer pulls
it forward while lower layer pulls it backward.
This results in force between the layers. This
type of ﬂow is known as laminar. The layers of
liquid slide over one another as the pages of a
book do when it is placed ﬂat on a table and a
horizontal force is applied to the top cover. When
a ﬂuid is ﬂowing in a pipe or a tube, then velocity
of the liquid layer along the axis of the tube is
maximum and decreases gradually as we move
towards the walls where it becomes zero, Fig.
10.14 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface
in a tube is constant.

On account of this motion, a portion of liquid,
which at some instant has the shape ABCD, take
the shape of AEFD after short interval of time