268

PHYSICS

 

the solid, this will reduce Ssl and therefore,
cos 0 may increase or 0 may decrease. In this
case 0 is an acute angle. This is what happens
for water on glass or on plastic and for kerosene
oil on virtually anything (it just spreads). Soaps,
detergents and dying substances are wetting
agents. When they are added the angle of
contact becomes small so that these may
penetrate well and become effective. Water
proofing agents on the other hand are added to
create a large angle of contact between the water
and fibres.

10.6.4 Drops and Bubbles

One consequence of surface tension is that free
liquid drops and bubbles are spherical if effects
of gravity can be neglected. You must have seen
this especially clearly in small drops just formed
in a high-speed spray or jet, and in soap bubbles
blown by most of us in childhood. Why are drops
and bubbles spherical? What keeps soap
bubbles stable?

As we have been saying repeatedly, a liquid-
air interface has energy, so for a given volume
the surface with minimum energy is the one with
the least area. The sphere has this property.
Though it is out of the scope of this book, but
you can check that a sphere is better than at
least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and
other forces (e. g. air resistance) were ineffective,
liquid drops would be spherical.

Another interesting consequence of surface
tension is that the pressure inside a spherical
drop Fig. 10.20(a) is more than the pressure
outside. Suppose a spherical drop of radius r is
in equilibrium. If its radius increase by Ar. The
extra surface energy is

[47c(r + Ar) 2- 47cr2] Sla = 87cr Ar Sla (10.25)

If the drop is in equilibrium this energy cost is
balanced by the energy gain due to
expansion under the pressure difference (Pi — P0)
between the inside of the bubble and the outside.
The work done is

W= (Pi — P0) 47512Ar (10.26)
so that
(Pi — P0) = (2 Sla/ r) (10.27)
2019-20

In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the
convex side has a higher pressure than the
concave side. For example, an air bubble in a
liquid, would have higher pressure inside it.
See Fig 10.20 (b).

 

(a) (b)

Fig. 1 0.20 Drop, cavity and bubble of radius r.

A bubble Fig 10.20 (c) differs from a drop
and a cavity; in this it has two interfaces.

Applying the above argument we have for a
bubble

(P, — P0) = (4 s,,/ r) (10.28)

This is probably why you have to blow hard,
but not too hard, to form a soap bubble. A little
extra air pressure is needed inside!

10.6.5 Capillary Rise

One consequence of the pressure difference
across a curved liquid-air interface is the well-
known effect that water rises up in a narrow
tube in spite of gravity. The word capilla means
hair in Latin; if the tube were hair thin, the rise
would be very large. To see this, consider a
vertical capillary tube of circular cross section
(radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water
(Fig. 10.21). The contact angle between water

   

(b)

Fig. 1 0.21 Capillary rise, (a) Schematic picture of a
narrow tube immersed water.
(b) Enlarged picture near interface.