FIGURE 1. 1 1 Electric

 

 

i Physics

(a)

(b)

EXAMPLE 1 .7

field (a) due to a

charge Q. (b) due to a
charge 7Q.

18

Similarly the total force on charge —q at C is F3 = .5 F 11 , where 11 is
the unit vector along the direction bisecting the ABCA.

It is interesting to see that the sum of the forces on the three charges
is zero, i.e.,

F1 + F2 + F3 = 0

The result is not at all surprising. It follows straight from the fact

that Coulomb’s law is consistent with Newton’s third law. The proof
is left to you as an exercise.

1 .8 ELECTRIC FIELD

Let us consider a point charge Q placed in vacuum, at the origin 0. If we
place another point charge q at a point P, where OP = r, then the charge Q
will exert a force on q as per Coulomb’s law. We may ask the question: If
charge q is removed, then what is left in the surrounding? Is there
nothing? If there is nothing at the point P, then how does a force act
when we place the charge q at P. In order to answer such questions, the
early scientists introduced the concept of ﬁeld. According to this, we say
that the charge Q produces an electric ﬁeld everywhere in the surrounding.
When another charge q is brought at some point P, the ﬁeld there acts on
it and produces a force. The electric ﬁeld produced by the charge Q at a
point r is given as

1 Q 1 Q

E r = —i‘= —i'
( ) 47:80 r2 47580 r2 (1'6)

 

 

where i- : r/ r, is a unit vector from the origin to the point r. Thus, Eq.(1.6)

specifies the value of the electric field for each value of the position

vector 1'. The word “field” signiﬁes how some distributed quantity (which
could be a scalar or a vector) varies with position. The effect of the charge
has been incorporated in the existence of the electric ﬁeld. We obtain the
force F exerted by a charge Q on a charge q, as

F = 1 9—3 i-

471280 r

Note that the charge q also exerts an equal and opposite force on the
charge Q. The electrostatic force between the charges Q and q can be
looked upon as an interaction between charge q and the electric field of

Q and vice versa. If we denote the position of charge q by the vector 1', it

experiences a force F equal to the charge q multiplied by the electric

ﬁeld E at the location of q. Thus,
F(r) = q EM (1 .8)
Equation (1.8) defines the 81 unit of electric ﬁeld as N / 0*.
Some important remarks may be made here:

(i) From Eq. (1.8), we can infer that if q is unity, the electric ﬁeld due to
a charge Q is numerically equal to the force exerted by it. Thus, the
electric ﬁeld due to a charge Q at a point in space may be defined
as the force that a unit positive charge would experience if placed

 

(1.7)

* An alternate unit V/ m will be introduced in the next chapter.

2019-20