LAWS OF MOTION

l03

Answer As the string is inextensible, and the
pully is smooth, the 3 kg block and the 20 kg
trolley both have same magnitude of
acceleration. Applying second law to motion of
the block (Fig. 5.12(b)),
3O — T = 3a

Apply the second law to motion of the trolley (Fig.
5.12(c)),

T—J; = 20 a.
Now fk =ukN,
Here pk =0.04,
N = 20x 10
= 200 N.

Thus the equation for the motion of the trolley is
T— 0.04X 200 = 20 a Or T— 8 = 20a.

These equations give a = 2 m s*2 = 0.96 m s2

23
andT =27.1 N. 4

Rolling friction

A body like a ring or a sphere rolling without
slipping over a horizontal plane will suffer no
friction, in principle. At every instant, there is
just one point of contact between the body and
the plane and this point has no motion relative
to the plane. In this ideal situation, kinetic or
static friction is zero and the body should
continue to roll with constant velocity. We know,
in practice, this will not happen and some
resistance to motion (rolling friction) does occur,
i.e. to keep the body rolling, some applied force
is needed. For the same weight, rolling friction
is much smaller (even by 2 or 3 orders of
magnitude) than static or sliding friction. This

  
  
   

is the reason why discovery of the wheel has
been a major milestone in human history.

Rolling friction again has a complex origin,
though somewhat different from that of static
and sliding friction. During rolling, the surfaces
in contact get momentarily deformed a little, and
this results in a finite area (not a point) of the
body being in contact with the surface. The net
effect is that the component of the contact force
parallel to the surface opposes motion.

We often regard friction as something
undesirable. In many situations, like in a
machine with different moving parts, friction
does have a negative role. It opposes relative
motion and thereby dissipates power in the form
of heat, etc. Lubricants are a way of reducing
kinetic friction in a machine. Another way is to
use ball bearings between two moving parts of a
machine [Fig. 5.13(a)]. Since the rolling friction
between ball bearings and the surfaces in
contact is very small, power dissipation is
reduced. A thin cushion of air maintained
between solid surfaces in relative motion is
another effective way of reducing friction (Fig.
5.13(a)).

In many practical situations, however, friction
is critically needed. Kinetic friction that
dissipates power is nevertheless important for
quickly stopping relative motion. It is made use
of by brakes in machines and automobiles.
Similarly, static friction is important in daily
life. We are able to walk because of friction. It
is impossible for a car to move on a very slippery
road. On an ordinary road, the friction between
the tyres and the road provides the necessary
external force to accelerate the car.

Inﬂated balloon

Plastic disc with hole

 

Air cushion

 

 

(b)

Fig. 5.13 Some ways of reducing friction. (a) Ball bearings placed between moving parts of a machine.
(b) Compressed cushion of air between surfaces in relative motion.

2019-20