MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

N
45
U1

 

like in pigtails, for ease in manufacture,
ﬂexibility and strength.

A bridge has to be designed such that it can
withstand the load of the ﬂowing traffic, the force
of winds and its own weight. Similarly, in the
design of buildings the use of beams and columns
is very common. In both the cases, the
overcoming of the problem of bending of beam
under a load is of prime importance. The beam
should not bend too much or break. Let us
consider the case of a beam loaded at the centre
and supported near its ends as shown in
Fig. 9.8. A bar of length l, breadth b, and depth d
when loaded at the centre by a load W sags by
an amount given by

6= W l3/(4bd3Y) (9.17)

 

 

Fig. 9.8 A beam supported at the ends and loaded
at the centre.

This relation can be derived using what you
have already learnt and a little calculus. From
Eq. (9.16). we see that to reduce the bending
for a given load, one should use a material with
a large Young’s modulus Y. For a given material,
increasing the depth d rather than the breadth
b is more effective in reducing the bending, since
6 is proportional to d ‘3 and only to b'1(of course
the length lof the span should be as small as
possible). But on increasing the depth, unless
the load is exactly at the right place (difficult to
arrange in a bridge with moving traffic). the
deep bar may bend as shown in Fig. 9.9(b). This
is called buckling. To avoid this, a common
compromise is the cross-sectional shape shown
in Fig. 9.9(c). This section provides a large load-
bearing surface and enough depth to prevent
bending. This shape reduces the weight of the
beam without sacrificing the strength and
hence reduces the cost.

 

(«—9

w

(a) [b] (c)

Fig. 9.9 Different cross-sectional shapes of a beam.
(a) Rectangular section of a bar;
(b) A thin bar and how it can buckle;
(c) Commonly used section for a load

bearing bar.

The use of pillars or columns is also very
common in buildings and bridges. A pillar with
rounded ends as shown in Fig. 9. 10(a) supports
less load than that with a distributed shape at
the ends [Fig. 9.lO(b)]. The precise design of a
bridge or a building has to take into account
the conditions under which it will function, the
cost and long period, reliability of usable
material, etc.

{a} (b)

Fig. 9.10 Pillars orcolems: (a) a pillar with rounded
ends, (b) Pillar with distributed ends.

The answer to the question why the maximum
height of a mountain on earth is ~10 km can
also be provided by considering the elastic
properties of rocks. A mountain base is not under
uniform compression and this provides some
shearing stress to the rocks under which they
can ﬂow. The stress due to all the material on
the top should be less than the critical shearing
stress at which the rocks ﬂow.

At the bottom of a mountain of height h, the
force per unit area due to the weight of the
mountain is hpg where p is the density of the
material of the mountain and g is the acceleration

2019-20