102

PHYSICS

approximately true. Yet they are very useful in
practical calculations in mechanics.

Thus, when two bodies are in contact, each
experiences a contact force by the other. Friction,
by deﬁnition, is the component of the contact force
parallel to the surfaces in contact, which opposes
impending or actual relative motion between the
two surfaces. Note that it is not motion, but
relative motion that the frictional force opposes.
Consider a box lying in the compartment of a train
that is accelerating. If the box is stationary
relative to the train, it is in fact accelerating along
with the train. What forces cause the acceleration
of the box? Clearly, the only conceivable force in
the horizontal direction is the force of friction. If
there were no friction, the ﬂoor of the train would
slip by and the box would remain at its initial
position due to inertia (and hit the back side of
the train). This impending relative motion is
opposed by the static friction f8. Static friction
provides the same acceleration to the box as that
of the train, keeping it stationary relative to the
train.

b Example 5.7 Determine the maximum
acceleration of the train in which a box
lying on its ﬂoor will remain stationary.

given that the co—efficient of static friction

between the box and the train‘s ﬂoor is
0.15.

 

Answer Since the acceleration of the box is due
to the static friction,

ma=fsSusN=us mg
i.e. a<usg
#59 =0.l5 xlOms‘2
1.5 ms‘2 4

.' amax

> Example 5.8 See Fig. 5. l l . A mass of 4 kg
rests on a horizontal plane. The plane is
gradually inclined until at an angle 6 = 15°
with the horizontal, the mass just begins to
slide. What is the coefficient of static friction
between the block and the surface '?

Fig. 5.11

2019-20

Answer The forces acting on a block of mass m
at rest on an inclined plane are (i) the weight
mg acting vertically downwards (ii) the normal
force N of the plane on the block, and (iii) the
static frictional force f5 opposing the impending
motion. In equilibrium, the resultant of these
forces must be zero. Resolving the weight mg
along the two directions shown, we have
mgsin0=fs, mg cos0 = N

As 0 increases, the self-adjusting frictional force
f5 increases until at 6 = 0m, fS achieves its

maximum value, (f5 )max = us N.

Therefore,
tan em = us or em = tan’1 us

When 0 becomes just a little more than 6m ,
there is a small net force on the block and it
begins to slide. Note that am depends only on
us and is independent of the mass of the block.

For em” = 15°,
us = tan 15°
= 0.27 4

P Example 5.9 What is the acceleration of
the block and trolley system shown in a
Fig. 5. l2(a). if the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction
between the trolley and the surface is 0.04?
What is the tension in the string? (Take g =
10 m s2). Neglect the mass of the string.

 

A;
30N fk T
(b) (C)

Fig. 5.12