WORK. ENERGY AND POWER

    
        
         
         
      
   
 

   

Physical Quantity

  
 

s...
W J

[ML2T_2]
Kinetic energy K [MLZT'2] J

Work

Potential energy V(x) [MLZT'Z] J dV(x)

 

Mechanical energy E [ML’T‘Z] J E = K + V

Spring constant k [MT—2] N m‘1 = _ kx

[ML’T‘3]

POINTS T0 PONDER

l. The phrase ‘calculate the work done' is incomplete. We should refer [or imply
clearly by context) to the work done by a speciﬁc force or a group of forces on a
given body over a certain displacement.

Work done is a scalar quantity. It can be positive or negative unlike mass and
kinetic energy which are positive scalar quantities. The work done by the friction
or viscous force on a moving body is negative.
For two bodies. the sum of the mutual forces exerted between them is zero from
Newton‘s Third Law.

F + F = 0

12 21
But the sum of the work done by the two forces need not always cancel. Le.

W12+ W21¢ 0

However. it may sometimes be true.

The work done by a force can be calculated sometimes even if the exact nature of
the force is not known. This is clear from Example 6.2 where the WE theorem is
used in such a situation.

The WE theorem is not independent of Newton's Second Law. The WE theorem
may be viewed as a scalar form of the Second Law. The principle of conservation

of mechanical energy may be viewed as a consequence of the WE theorem for
conservative forces.

The WE theorem holds in all inertial frames. It can also be extended to non—
inertial frames provided we include the pseudoforces in the calculation of the
net force acting on the body under consideration.

The potential energy of a body subjected to a conservative force is always
undetermined upto a constant. For example. the point where the potential
energy is zero is a matter of choice. For the gravitational potential energy mgh,
the zero of the potential energy is chosen to be the ground. For the spring
potential energy 1063/2 . the zero of the potential energy is the equilibrium position
of the oscillating mass.

Every force encountered in mechanics does not have an associated potential
energy. For example. work done by friction over a closed path is not zero and no
potential energy can be associated with friction.

During a collision : (a) the total linear momentum is conserved at each instant of
the collision ; (b) the kinetic energy conservation [even if the collision is elastic)
applies after the collision is over and does not hold at every instant of the collision.
In fact the two colliding objects are deformed and may be momentarily at rest
with respect to each other.

 

2019-20

133