WAV ES

379

If on the other hand, the boundary point is
not rigid but completely free to move (such as in
the case of a string tied to a freely moving ring
on a rod), the reﬂected pulse has the same phase
and amplitude (assuming no energy dissipation)
as the incident pulse. The net maximum
displacement at the boundary is then twice the
amplitude of each pulse. An example of non- rigid
boundary is the open end of an organ pipe.

To summarise, a travelling wave or pulse
suffers a phase change of 7c on reﬂection at a
rigid boundary and no phase change on
reﬂection at an open boundary. To put this
mathematically, let the incident travelling wave
be

y2(x,t) = asin(kx—a)t)

At a rigid boundary, the reﬂected wave is given
by
yr(x, t) = a sin (kx— wt + 7:).
= — asin (kx—wt) (15.35)
At an open boundary, the reﬂected wave is given
by
yr(x, t) = a sin (kx— wt + O).
= asin (kx—wt) (15.36)

Clearly, at the rigid boundary, y = y2 + yr 2 0

at all times.

15.6.1 Standing Waves and Normal Modes

We considered above reﬂection at one boundary.
But there are familiar situations (a string fixed
at either end or an air column in a pipe with
either end closed) in which reﬂection takes place
at two or more boundaries. In a string, for
example, a wave travelling in one direction will
get reﬂected at one end, which in turn will travel
and get reﬂected from the other end. This will
go on until there is a steady wave pattern set
up on the string. Such wave patterns are called
standing waves or stationary waves. To see this
mathematically, consider a wave travelling
along the positive direction of x-axis and a
reﬂected wave of the same amplitude and
wavelength in the negative direction of x-axis.
From Eqs. (15.2) and (15.4), with ¢= O, we get:

y,(x, t) = asin (kx— wt)

y2(x, t) = a sin (kx + cot)

The resultant wave on the string is, according
to the principle of superposition:

y (x, t) = y1(x, t) + y2(x, t)

= a [sin (kx— wt) + sin (kx + wt)]

Using the familiar trignometric identity
Sin (A+B) + Sin (A—B) = 2 sin A cosB we get,

y (x, t) = 2a sin kxcos wt (15.37)

Note the important difference in the wave
pattern described by Eq. (15.37) from that
described by Eq. (15.2) or Eq. (15.4). The terms
kx and cut appear separately, not in the
combination kx - cut. The amplitude of this wave
is 2a sin kx. Thus, in this wave pattern, the
amplitude varies from point-to-point, but each
element of the string oscillates with the same
angular frequency a) or time period. There is no
phase difference between oscillations of different
elements of the wave. The string as a whole
vibrates in phase with differing amplitudes at
different points. The wave pattern is neither
moving to the right nor to the left. Hence, they
are called standing or stationary waves. The
amplitude is fixed at a given location but, as
remarked earlier, it is different at different
locations. The points at which the amplitude is
zero (i.e., where there is no motion at all) are
nodes; the points at which the amplitude is the
largest are called antinodes. Fig. 15.12 shows
a stationary wave pattern resulting from
superposition of two travelling waves in
opposite directions.

The most significant feature of stationary
waves is that the boundary conditions constrain
the possible wavelengths or frequencies of
vibration of the system. The system cannot
oscillate with any arbitrary frequency (contrast
this with a harmonic travelling wave), but is
characterised by a set of natural frequencies or
normal modes of oscillation. Let us determine
these normal modes for a stretched string fixed
at both ends.

First, from Eq. (15.37), the positions of nodes
(where the amplitude is zero) are given by
sin kx = O .
which implies

kx= mt; n=0, 1, 2, 3,

Since, k = 27r//’L , we get

m1

x=?;n=0, 1,2,3,... (15.38)

Clearly, the distance between any two

2

successive nodes is _ In the same way, the
2.

2019-20