Magnetism and
Mo’r’rer

 

POINTS TO PONDER

l. A satisfactory understanding of magnetic phenomenon in terms of moving
charges / currents was arrived at after 1800 AD. But technological
exploitation of the directional properties of magnets predates this scientific
understanding by two thousand years. Thus, scientific understanding is
not a necessary condition for engineering applications. Ideally, science
and engineering go hand—in—hand, one leading and assisting the other in
tandem.

2. Magnetic monopoles do not exist. If you slice a magnet in half, you get
two smaller magnets. On the other hand, isolated positive and negative
charges exist. There exists a smallest unit of charge, for example, the
electronic charge with value |e| = 1.6 ><lO~19 C. All other charges are
integral multiples of this smallest unit charge. In other words, charge is
quantised. We do not know why magnetic monopoles do not exist or why
electric charge is quantised.

3. A consequence of the fact that magnetic monopoles do not exist is that
the magnetic field lines are continuous and form closed loops. In contrast,
the electrostatic lines of force begin on a positive charge and terminate
on the negative charge [or fade out at infinity).

4. The earth’s magnetic field is not due to a huge bar magnet inside it. The
earth's core is hot and molten. Perhaps convective currents in this core
are responsible for the earth’s magnetic field. As to what ‘dynamo’ effect
sustains this current, and why the earth’s field reverses polarity every
million years or so, we do not know.

5. A miniscule difference in the value of x, the magnetic susceptibility, yields
radically different behaviour: diamagnetic versus paramagnetic. For
diamagnetic materials )5 = —10”5 whereas 95 = +10'5 for paramagnetic
materials.

6. There exists a perfect diamagnet, namely, a superconductor. This is a
metal at very low temperatures. In this case x = —1, ,ur = 0, ,u = 0. The
external magnetic field is totally expelled. Interestingly, this material is
also a perfect conductor. However, there exists no classical theory which
ties these two properties together. A quantum—mechanical theory by
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer [BCS theory] explains these effects. The
BCS theory was proposed in1957 and was eventually recognised by a Nobel
Prize in physics in 1970.

7. The phenomenon of magnetic hysteresis is reminiscent of similar
behaviour concerning the elastic properties of materials. Strain
may not be proportional to stress; here H and B [or M] are not
linearly related. The stress—strain curve exhibits hysteresis and
area enclosed by it represents the energy dissipated per unit volume.
A similar interpretation can be given to the B—H magnetic hysteresis
curve.

8. Diamagnetism is universal. It is present in all materials. But it
is weak and hard to detect if the substance is para— or ferromagnetic.

9. We have classified materials as diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and
ferromagnetic. However, there exist additional types of magnetic material
such as ferrimagnetic, anti—ferromagnetic, spin glass, etc. with properties

which are exotic and mysterious.

199

2019-20