140 PIIYSICS

 

APPENDIX 6. 1 : POWER CONSUMPTION IN WALKING

The table below lists the approximate power expended by an adult human of mass 60 kg.

Table 6.4 Approximate power consumption

Mechanical work must not be confused with the everyday usage
Sleeping 75 of the term work. A woman standing with a very heavy load on
Slow Walking 200 her head may get very tired. But no mechanical work is involved.
Bicycling 500 That is not to say that mechanical work cannot be estimated in

Heart beat 12 ordinary human activity.

 

Consider a person walking with constant speed we. The mechanical work he does may be estimated simply

with the help of the work—energy theorem. Assume :

(a) The major work done in walking is due to the acceleration and deceleration of the legs with each stride
[See Fig. 6.20).

[b] Neglect air resistance.

[c] Neglect the small work done in lifting the legs against gravity.

[d] Neglect the swinging of hands etc. as is common in walking.

As we can see in Fig. 6.20, in each stride the leg is brought from rest to a speed, approximately equal to the
speed of walking, and then brought to rest again.

 

4—1 stride -—>

Fig. 6.20 An illustration of a single stride in walking. While the ﬁrst leg is maximally off the round, the second leg
is on the ground and vice-versa

The work done by one leg in each stride is ml [)3 by the work—energy theorem. Here ml is the mass of the leg.

Note ml vg/Z energy is expended by one set of leg muscles to bring the foot from rest to speed v0 while an

additional ml v3 /2 is expended by a complementary set of leg muscles to bring the foot to rest from speed v0.
Hence work done by both legs in one stride is (study Fig. 6.20 carefully)
WS=2ml mg [6.34)

Assuming mass of the leg ml: 10 kg and slow running with a speed of 10 km in a hour which translates to
approximately 3 m s‘l, we obtain

WS 2 180 J / stride

If we take a stride to be 2 m long, the person covers 1.5 strides per second at his speed of 3 m s‘l. Thus the
power expended

 

 

P=180 J x1.5 snide
stride second
= 270 W

We must bear in mind that this is a lower estimate since several avenues of power loss [e.g. swinging of hands,
air resistance etc.) have been ignored. The interesting point is that we did not worry about the forces involved.
The forces, mainly friction and those exerted on the leg by the muscles of the rest of the body, are hard to
estimate. Static friction does no work and we bypassed the impossible task of estimating the work done by the
muscles by taking recourse to the work—energy theorem. We can also see the advantage of a wheel. The wheel
permits smooth locomotion without the continual starting and stopping in mammalian locomotion.

2019-20