i Physics

Clearly, the number of ﬁeld lines crossing the
area element will be smaller. The projection of
the area element normal to E is AS cos0. Thus,
the number of field lines crossing AS is
proportional to E AS cos6. When 0 = 90°, field
lines will be parallel to AS and will not cross it

—’ E we place a small planar element of area AS
I normal to E at a point, the number of field lines

_ _. E crossing it is proportional* to E AS. Now

As — w suppose we tilt the area element by angle 6.

 

E at all (Fig. 1.18).
The orientation of area element and not
— merely its magnitude is important in many
contexts. For example, in a stream, the amount
_ of water ﬂowing through a ring will naturally

depend on how you hold the ring. If you hold
it normal to the ﬂow, maximum water will ﬂow
through it than if you hold it with some other
orientation. This shows that an area element
should be treated as a vector. It has a
magnitude and also a direction. How to specify the direction of a planar
area? Clearly, the normal to the plane specifies the orientation of the
plane. Thus the direction of a planar area vector is along its normal.

How to associate a vector to the area of a curved surface? We imagine
dividing the surface into a large number of very small area elements.
Each small area element may be treated as planar and a vector associated
with it, as explained before.

Notice one ambiguity here. The direction of an area element is along
its normal. But a normal can point in two directions. Which direction do
we choose as the direction of the vector associated with the area element?
This problem is resolved by some convention appropriate to the given
as = A S ,3 context. For the case of a closed surface, this convention is very simple.
The vector associated with every area element of a closed surface is taken
to be in the direction of the outward normal. This is the convention used
in Fig. 1.19. Thus, the area element vector AS at a point on a closed

FIGURE 1.18 Dependence of ﬂux on the
inclination 6 between E and n .

 

surface equals AS 11 where AS is the magnitude of the area element and

fl is a unit vector in the direction of outward normal at that point.
We now come to the definition of electric ﬂux. Electric ﬂux A¢ through

an area element AS is defined by
A¢=E~AS =EAS cos0 (1.11)

which, as seen before, is proportional to the number of field lines cutting
the area element. The angle 0 here is the angle between E and AS. For a
closed surface, with the convention stated already, 9 is the angle between
FIGURE 1. 19 E and the outward normal to the area element. Notice we could look at
the expression E AS cos0 in two ways: E (AS cos6) i.e., E times the

 

Convention for

defining normal —
v. and AS. * It will not be proper to say that the number of field lines is equal to EAS. The

number of field lines is after all, a matter of how many field lines we choose to
draw. What is physically significant is the relative number of field lines crossing
a given area at different points.

26

2019-20