446

 

 

l Physics

 

(iii) The nuclear force between neutron-neutron, proton-neutron and
proton-proton is approximately the same. The nuclear force does not
depend on the electric charge.

Unlike Coulomb’s law or the Newton’s law of gravitation there is no
simple mathematical form of the nuclear force.

13.6 RADIOACTIVITY

A. H. Becquerel discovered radioactivity in 1896 purely by accident. While
studying the ﬂuorescence and phosphorescence of compounds irradiated
with visible light, Becquerel observed an interesting phenomenon. After
illuminating some pieces of uranium-potassium sulphate with visible
light, he wrapped them in black paper and separated the package from a
photographic plate by a piece of silver. When, after several hours of
exposure, the photographic plate was developed, it showed blackening
due to something that must have been emitted by the compound and
was able to penetrate both black paper and the silver.

Experiments performed subsequently showed that radioactivity was
a nuclear phenomenon in which an unstable nucleus undergoes a decay.
This is referred to as radioactive decay. Three types of radioactive decay
occur in nature :

(i) OL-decay in which a helium nucleus :He is emitted;

(ii) B-decay in which electrons or positrons (particles with the same mass
as electrons, but with a charge exactly opposite to that of electron)
are emitted;

(iii) y—decay in which high energy (hundreds of keV or more) photons are
emitted.

Each of these decay will be considered in subsequent sub-sections.

13.6. 1 Law of radioactive decay

In any radioactive sample, which undergoes on, B or Y—decay, it is found
that the number of nuclei undergoing the decay per unit time is
proportional to the total number of nuclei in the sample. If N is the

number of nuclei in the sample and AN undergo decay in time At then

MKN
At

or, AN/At=7LN, (13.10)
where 7L is called the radioactive decay constant or disintegration constant.

The change in the number of nuclei in the sample* is dN = — AN in
time At. Thus the rate of change of N is (in the limit At a 0)

dt

* AN is the number of nuclei that decay, and hence is always positive. dN is the
change in N, which may have either sign. Here it is negative, because out of
original N nuclei, AN have decayed, leaving (N—AN) nuclei.

2019-20