E

FIGURE 5.12
Behaviour of

magnetic field lines

(a) diamagnetic.
(b) paramagnetic

192

 

 

i Physics

(b)

near E1

substance.

—lsx<0 O<x<e x>>1
OSHr< 1 1< ,ur<1+e pr>> 1
#<#0 #>#o #>>H0

5.6. 1 Diamagnetism

Diamagnetic substances are those which have tendency to move from
stronger to the weaker part of the external magnetic ﬁeld. In other words,
unlike the way a magnet attracts metals like iron, it would repel a
diamagnetic substance.

Figure 5. 1 2(a) shows a bar of diamagnetic material placed in an external
magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁeld lines are repelled or expelled and the ﬁeld inside
the material is reduced. In most cases, as is evident from
Table 5.2, this reduction is slight, being one part in 105. When placed in a
non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld, the bar will tend to move from high to low ﬁeld.

The simplest explanation for diamagnetism is as follows. Electrons in
an atom orbiting around nucleus possess orbital angular momentum.
These orbiting electrons are equivalent to current-carrying loop and thus
possess orbital magnetic moment. Diamagnetic substances are the ones
in which resultant magnetic moment in an atom is zero. When magnetic
field is applied, those electrons having orbital magnetic moment in the
same direction slow down and those in the opposite direction speed up.
This happens due to induced current in accordance with Lenz’s law which
you will study in Chapter 6. Thus, the substance develops a net magnetic
moment in direction opposite to that of the applied ﬁeld and hence

repulsion.

Some diamagnetic materials are bismuth, copper, lead, silicon,
nitrogen (at STP), water and sodium chloride. Diamagnetism is present
in all the substances. However, the effect is so weak in most cases that it
gets shifted by other effects like paramagnetism, ferromagnetism, etc.

The most exotic diamagnetic materials are superconductors. These
are metals, cooled to very low temperatures which exhibits both perfect
conductivity and perfect diamagnetism Here the ﬁeld lines are completely
expelled! = —1 and ur = O. A superconductor repels a magnet and (by
Newton’s third law) is repelled by the magnet. The phenomenon of perfect
diamagnetism in superconductors is called the Meissner effect, after the
name of its discoverer. Superconducting magnets can be gainfully
exploited in variety of situations, for example, for running magnetically
levitated superfast trains.

5.6.2 Paramagnetism

Paramagnetic substances are those which get weakly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld. They have tendency to move from a
region of weak magnetic ﬁeld to strong magnetic ﬁeld, i.e., they get weakly
attracted to a magnet.

2019-20