and molecules, governed by the interaction of each atom or
molecule with its neighbours. In contrast light emitted from
rarefied gases heated in a ﬂame, or excited electrically in a
glow tube such as the familiar neon sign or mercury vapour
light has only certain discrete wavelengths. The spectrum
appears as a series of bright lines. In such gases, the
average spacing between atoms is large. Hence, the
radiation emitted can be considered due to individual atoms
rather than because of interactions between atoms or
molecules.

In the early nineteenth century it was also established
that each element is associated with a characteristic
spectrum of radiation, for example, hydrogen always gives
a set of lines with fixed relative position between the lines.
This fact suggested an intimate relationship between the
internal structure of an atom and the spectrum of
radiation emitted by it. In 1885, Johann Jakob Balmer
(1825 — 1898) obtained a simple empirical formula which
gave the wavelengths of a group of lines emitted by atomic
hydrogen. Since hydrogen is simplest of the elements
known, we shall consider its spectrum in detail in this
chapter.

Ernst Rutherford (187 1—1937), a former research
student of J . J. Thomson, was engaged in experiments on
oc—particles emitted by some radioactive elements. In 1906,
he proposed a classic experiment of scattering of these
oc-particles by atoms to investigate the atomic structure.
This experiment was later performed around 19 l l by Hans
Geiger (1 882—1 945) and Ernst Marsden (l 889— l 970, who
was 20 year-old student and had not yet earned his
bachelor’s degree). The details are discussed in Section
12.2. The explanation of the results led to the birth of
Rutherford’s planetary model of atom (also called the
nuclear model of the atom). According to this the entire
positive charge and most of the mass of the atom is

 

Ernst Rutherford [1871 -
1937) New Zealand born,
British physicist who did
pioneering ‘work on
radioactive radiation. He
discovered alpha-rays and
beta-rays. Along with
Federick Soddy, he created
the modern theory of
radioactivity. He studied
the ‘emanation’ of thorium
and discovered a new noble
gas, an isotope of radon,
now known as thoron. By
scattering alpha-rays from
the metal foils, he
discovered the atomic
nucleus and proposed the
plenatery model of the
atom. He also estimated the
approximate size of the
nucleus.

concentrated in a small volume called the nucleus with electrons revolving

around the nucleus just as planets revolve around the sun.

Rutherford’s nuclear model was a major step towards how we see
the atom today. However, it could not explain why atoms emit light of
only discrete wavelengths. How could an atom as simple as hydrogen,
consisting of a single electron and a single proton, emit a complex
spectrum of speciﬁc wavelengths? In the classical picture of an atom, the
electron revolves round the nucleus much like the way a planet revolves
round the sun. However, we shall see that there are some serious

difficulties in accepting such a model.

12.2 ALPHA-PARTICLE SCATTERING AND

RUTHERFORD’S NUCLEAR MODEL OF ATOM

At the suggestion of Ernst Rutherford, in 19 l 1, H. Geiger and E. Marsden
performed some experiments. In one of their experiments, as shown in

2019-20

{11
E
(D
H
E
H
I
Fl
Q
Q
6
0'?)
\]
r—a
|
E
:1

 

415