LAWS OF MOTION

107

 

directed upwards (not shown in the
figure).

(ii) the force on the ﬂoor by the system
(action); the force on the system by the
ﬂoor (reaction). In addition, for (b), the
force on the block by the cylinder and
the force on the cylinder by the block
also constitute an action-reaction pair.

The important thing to remember is that an
action-reaction pair consists of mutual forces
which are always equal and opposite between
two bodies. Two forces on the same body which
happen to be equal and opposite can never
constitute an action-reaction pair. The force of

gravity on the mass in (a) or (b) and the normal
force on the mass by the ﬂoor are not action-
reaction pairs. These forces happen to be equal
and opposite for (a) since the mass is at rest.
They are not so for case (b), as seen already.
The weight of the system is 270 N, while the
normal force R’ is 267.3 N. 4

The practice of drawing free-body diagrams is
of great help in solving problems in mechanics.
It allows you to clearly define your system and
consider all forces on the system due to objects
that are not part of the system itself. A number
of exercises in this and subsequent chapters will
help you cultivate this practice.

SUMNIARY

Aristotle's View that a force is necessary to keep a body in uniform motion is wrong. A
force is necessary in practice to counter the opposing force of friction.
Galileo extrapolated simple observations on motion of bodies on inclined planes, and
arrived at the law of inertia. Newton’s first law of motion is the same law rephrased
thus: “Everybody continues to be in its state of rest or of unifom motion in a straight line,
unless compelled by some external force to act otherwise’. In simple terms, the First Law
is “If external force on a body is zero, its acceleration is zero".
Momentum (p) of a body is the product of its mass (m) and velocity (V) :

p = mv
Newton’s second law of motion :
The rate of change of momentum of a body is proportional to the applied force and takes
place in the direction in which the force acts. Thus

F=kd—p=kma

dt

where F is the net external force on the body and a its acceleration. We set the constant
of proportionality k = 1 in SI units. Then

The SI unit of force is newton : 1 N = 1 kg m s2,

[a] The second law is consistent with the First Law [F = 0 implies a = 0)

(b) It is a vector equation

(c) It is applicable to a particle, and also to a body or a system of particles, provided F
is the total external force on the system and a is the acceleration of the system as
a whole.

(d) F at a point at a certain instant determines a at the same point at that instant.
That is the Second Law is a local law; a at an instant does not depend on the
history of motion.

Impulse is the product of force and time which equals change in momentum.

The notion of impulse is useful when a large force acts for a short time to produce a

measurable change in momentum. Since the time of action of the force is very short,

one can assume that there is no appreciable change in the position of the body during
the action of the impulsive force.

Newton’s third law of motion:

To every action, there is always an equal and opposite reaction

2019-20