Current
Electricity

number of electrons travelling in any direction will be equal to the number
of electrons travelling in the opposite direction. 80, there will be no net
electric current.

Let us now see what happens to such a
piece of conductor if an electric ﬁeld is applied.
To focus our thoughts, imagine the conductor
in the shape of a cylinder of radius R (Fig. 3.1).
Suppose we now take two thin circular discs FIGURE 3. 1 Charges + Q and —Q put at the ends
Of a diel€CtriC 0f the same radius and put of a metallic cylinder. The electrons will drift

 

pOSitive Charge +Q diStﬁbUted 0Ver one disc because of the electric field created to
and similarly —Q at the other disc. We attach neutralise the charges. The current thus
the two discs on the tWO ﬂat surfaces of the will stop after a while unless the charges +Q
cylinder. An electric field will be created and and ”Q are COHtiHUOUSlY repleniShEd-

is directed from the positive towards the
negative charge. The electrons will be accelerated due to this field towards
+Q. They will thus move to neutralise the charges. The electrons, as long
as they are moving, will constitute an electric current. Hence in the
situation considered, there will be a current for a very short while and no
current thereafter.
We can also imagine a mechanism where the ends of the cylinder are
supplied with fresh charges to make up for any charges neutralised by
electrons moving inside the conductor. In that case, there will be a steady
electric ﬁeld in the body of the conductor. This will result in a continuous
current rather than a current for a short period of time. Mechanisms, 1/
which maintain a steady electric field are cells or batteries that we shall /
study later in this chapter. In the next sections, we shall study the steady A
current that results from a steady electric field in conductors.

3.4 OHM’s LAW

A basic law regarding ﬂow of currents was discovered by G.S. Ohm in
1828, long before the physical mechanism responsible for ﬂow of currents
was discovered. Imagine a conductor through which a current I is ﬂowing
and let Vbe the potential difference between the ends of the conductor.
Then Ohm’s law states that

Vo<I

or, V=RI (3.3)

where the constant of proportionality R is called the resistance of the
conductor. The SI units of resistance is ohm, and is denoted by the symbol 2;:
£2. The resistance R not only depends on the material of the conductor
but also on the dimensions of the conductor. The dependence of R on the
dimensions of the conductor can easily be determined as follows. FIGURE 3.2
Consider a conductor satisfying Eq. (3.3) to be in the form of a slab of Illustrating the
length land cross sectional areaA [Fig. 3.2(a)]. Imagine placing two such FClatiOH R = Pt/A for
identical slabs side by side [Fig. 3.2(b)], so that the length of the a rectangular Slab
combination is 21. The current ﬂowing through the combination is the Of length I an? area
same as that ﬂowing through either of the slabs. If V is the potential Of cross—semon A'
difference across the ends of the first slab, then Vis also the potential
difference across the ends of the second slab since the second slab is

 

(C)

95

2019-20