l Physics

 

     
 
 
  

(2) This is called total internal reﬂection. When
Rarer light gets reﬂected by a surface, normally
mfgﬁm some fraction of it gets transmitted. The

water—air reﬂected ray, therefore, is always less intense
D 04? Interface than the incident ray, howsoever smooth the
reﬂecting surface may be. In total internal
reflection, on the other hand, no
transmission of light takes place.

The angle of incidence corresponding to
an angle of refraction 90°, say LAOSN, is
called the critical angle (ic) for the given pair
FIGURE 9. 12 Refraction and internal reﬂection ofmedia. We see from Snell’s laW [Eq. (9. 10)]

(1)

Denser reﬂected ray

medium

Partially
(water)

A C reﬂected rays

of rays from a point A in the denser medium that if the relative refractive index is less
(water) incident at different angles at the interface than one then, since the maximum value
With a rarer “ledium (air). of sin r is unity, there is an upper limit
to the value of sin i for which the law can be satisfied, that is, i = ic

such that
sin is = n21 (9.12)

For values of i larger than ic, Snell’s law of refraction cannot be
satisﬁed, and hence no refraction is possible.

The refractive index of denser medium 1 with respect to rarer medium
2 will be n12 = 1 / sin ic. Some typical critical angles are listed in Table 9. 1.

TABLE 9. 1 CRITICAL ANGLE OF SOME TRANSPARENT MEDIA WITH RESPECT TO AIR

 

Water 1.33 48.75
Crown glass 1.52 41.14
Dense ﬂint glass 1.62 37.31
Diamond 2.42 24.41

A demonstration for total internal reﬂection

All optical phenomena can be demonstrated very easily with the use of a
laser torch or pointer, which is easily available nowadays. Take a glass
beaker with clear water in it. Add a few drops of milk or any other
suspension to water and stir so that water becomes a little turbid. Take
a laser pointer and shine its beam through the turbid water. You will
find that the path of the beam inside the water shines brightly.

Shine the beam from below the beaker such that it strikes at the
upper water surface at the other end. Do you find that it undergoes partial
reﬂection (which is seen as a spot on the table below) and partial refraction
[which comes out in the air and is seen as a spot on the roof; Fig. 9.1 3(a)]?
Now direct the laser beam from one side of the beaker such that it strikes
the upper surface of water more obliquely [Fig. 9.13(b)]. Adjust the

320 direction of laser beam until you find the angle for which the refraction

2019-20