Dual Nature of Radiation
and Muller

 

(b) Obtain the de Broglie wavelength associated with thermal
neutrons at room temperature (27 °C). Hence explain why a fast
neutron beam needs to be thermalised with the environment
before it can be used for neutron diffraction experiments.

11.33 An electron microscope uses electrons accelerated by a voltage of
50 kV. Determine the de Broglie wavelength associated with the
electrons. If other factors (such as numerical aperture, etc.) are
taken to be roughly the same, how does the resolving power of an
electron microscope compare with that of an optical microscope
which uses yellow light?

11.34 The wavelength of a probe is roughly a measure of the size of a
structure that it can probe in some detail. The quark structure
of protons and neutrons appears at the minute length-scale of
10115 m or less. This structure was first probed in early 1970’s using
high energy electron beams produced by a linear accelerator at
Stanford, USA. Guess what might have been the order of energy of
these electron beams. (Rest mass energy of electron = 0.511 MeV.)

11.35 Find the typical de Broglie wavelength associated with a He atom in
helium gas at room temperature (27 °C) and 1 atm pressure; and
compare it with the mean separation between two atoms under these
conditions.

11.36 Compute the typical de Broglie wavelength of an electron in a metal
at 27 °C and compare it with the mean separation between two
electrons in a metal which is given to be about 2 X 10‘10 m.

[Note: Exercises 1 1.35 and 1 1.36 reveal that while the wave-packets
associated with gaseous molecules under ordinary conditions are
non-overlapping, the electron wave-packets in a metal strongly
overlap with one another. This suggests that whereas molecules in
an ordinary gas can be distinguished apart, electrons in a metal
cannot be distintguished apart from one another. This
indistinguishibility has many fundamental implications which you
will explore in more advanced Physics courses.]

11.37 Answer the following questions:

(a) Quarks inside protons and neutrons are thought to carry
fractional charges [(+2/3)e ; (—1/3)e]. Why do they not show up
in Millikan’s oil-drop experiment?

(b) What is so special about the combination 6/ m? Why do we not
simply talk of e and m separately?

(c) Why should gases be insulators at ordinary pressures and start
conducting at very low pressures?

(d) Every metal has a definite work function. Why do all
photoelectrons not come out with the same energy if incident
radiation is monochromatic? Why is there an energy distribution
of photoelectrons?

(e) The energy and momentum of an electron are related to the
frequency and wavelength of the associated matter wave by the
relations:

h

E=hv,p= 1

But while the value of l is physically significant, the value of v
(and therefore, the value of the phase speed VA) has no physical
significance. Why? 41 1

2019-20