I28

PIIYSICS

 

We point out a common misconception created
by newspapers and magazines. They mention
food values in calories and urge us to restrict
diet intake to below 2400 calories. What they
should be saying is kilocalories (kcal) and not
calories. A person consuming 2400 calories a
day will soon starve to death! 1 food calorie is
1 kcal. 4

6.10.6 The Principle of Conservation of
Energy

We have seen that the total mechanical energy
of the system is conserved if the forces doing work
on it are conservative. If some of the forces
involved are non-conservative, part of the
mechanical energy may get transformed into
other forms such as heat, light and sound.
However, the total energy of an isolated system
does not change, as long as one accounts for all
forms of energy. Energy may be transformed from
one form to another but the total energy of an
isolated system remains constant. Energy can
neither be created, nor destroyed.

Since the universe as a whole may be viewed
as an isolated system, the total energy of the
universe is constant. If one part of the universe
loses energy, another part must gain an equal
amount of energy.

The principle of conservation of energy cannot
be proved. However, no violation of this principle
has been observed. The concept of conservation
and transformation of energy into various forms
links together various branches of physics,
chemistry and life sciences. It provides a
unifying, enduring element in our scientific
pursuits. From engineering point of view all
electronic, communication and mechanical
devices rely on some forms of energy
transformation.

6. 1 1 POWER

Often it is interesting to know not only the work
done on an object, but also the rate at which
this work is done. We say a person is physically
fit if he not only climbs four ﬂoors of a building
but climbs them fast. Power is defined as the
time rate at which work is done or energy is
transferred.

The average power of a force is defined as the
ratio of the work, W, to the total time ttaken

2019-20

W
t

The instantaneous power is defined as the
limiting value of the average power as time
interval approaches zero,

p:d_W
dt

The work dW done by a force F for a displacement
dr is dW = F.dr. The instantaneous power can
also be expressed as

P=F.£
dt

= F.v (6.22)

where v is the instantaneous velocity when the
force is F.

Power, like work and energy, is a scalar
quantity. Its dimensions are [MLQT’3]. In the SI,
its unit is called a watt (W). The watt is l J s4.
The unit of power is named after James Watt,
one of the innovators of the steam engine in the
eighteenth century.

There is another unit of power, namely the
horse-power (hp)

1 hp = 746 W
This unit is still used to describe the output of
automobiles, motorbikes, etc.

We encounter the unit watt when we buy
electrical goods such as bulbs, heaters and
refrigerators. A 100 watt bulb which is on for l 0
hours uses 1 kilowatt hour (kWh) of energy.

100 (watt) x 10 (hour)
= 1000 watt hour
= l kilowatt hour (kWh)
= 103 (W) x 3600 (s)
= 3.6 x 106 J

Our electricity bills carry the energy
consumption in units of kWh. Note that kWh is
a unit of energy and not of power.

p:

an

(6.21)

V Example 6.11 An elevator can carry a
maximum load of 1800 kg (elevator +
passengers) is moving up with a constant
speed of 2 m s“. The frictional force opposing

the motion is 4000 N. Determine the
minimum power delivered by the motor to
the elevator in watts as well as in horse
power.