8.11

8.12

8.13

8.14

8.15

 

 

Electromagnetic
Waves

 

(a) What is the wavelength of the wave?

(b) What is the amplitude of the oscillating magnetic field?

(c) Show that the average energy density of the E field equals the
average energy density of the B field. [c = 3 X 108 m s’1.]

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

Suppose that the electric field part of an electromagnetic wave in
vacuum is E = {(3.1 N/C) cos [(1.8 rad/m) y + (5.4 X 106 rad/SM}?

(a) What is the direction of propagation?

(b) What is the wavelength xi ?

(c) What is the frequency v ?

(d) What is the amplitude of the magnetic field part of the wave?
(e) Write an expression for the magnetic field part of the wave.

About 5% of the power of a 100 W light bulb is converted to visible
radiation. What is the average intensity of visible radiation

(a) at a distance of 1m from the bulb?

(b) at a distance of 10 m?

Assume that the radiation is emitted isotropically and neglect
reﬂection.

Use the formula lmT = 0.29 ch to obtain the characteristic
temperature ranges for different parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum. What do the numbers that you obtain tell you?

Given below are some famous numbers associated with

electromagnetic radiations in different contexts in physics. State
the part of the electromagnetic spectrum to which each belongs.

(a) 21 cm (wavelength emitted by atomic hydrogen in interstellar
space).

(b) 1057 MHZ (frequency of radiation arising from two close energy
levels in hydrogen; known as Lamb shift).

(c) 2.7 K [temperature associated with the isotropic radiation filling
all space-thought to be a relic of the ‘big-bang’ origin of the
universe].

(d) 5890 A - 5896 A [double lines of sodium]

(e) 14.4 keV [energy of a particular transition in 57Fe nucleus
associated with a famous high resolution spectroscopic method
(Mossbauer spectroscopy)].

Answer the following questions:

(a) Long distance radio broadcasts use short-wave bands. Why?

(b) It is necessary to use satellites for long distance TV transmission.
Why?

(c) Optical and radiotelescopes are built on the ground but X-ray
astronomy is possible only from satellites orbiting the earth.
Why?

(d) The small ozone layer on top of the stratosphere is crucial for
human survival. Why?

(e) If the earth did not have an atmosphere, would its average
surface temperature be higher or lower than what it is now?

(f) Some scientists have predicted that a global nuclear war on the
earth would be followed by a severe ‘nuclear winter’ with a
devastating effect on life on earth. What might be the basis of
this prediction?

2019-20

287