Moving Charges and
Magnetism

#ONI
27tr

We shall now compare the two results: for a toroid and solenoid. We
re-express Eq. (4.2 1) to make the comparison easier with the solenoid
result given in Eq. (4.20). Let rbe the average radius of the toroid and n
be the number of turns per unit length. Then

8:

 

(4.21)

N = 2m n = (average) perimeter of the toroid

X number of turns per unit length
and thus,

B = #0 n1, (4.22)

i.e., the result for the solenoid!
In an ideal toroid the coils are circular. In reality the turns of the
toroidal coil form a helix and there is always a small magnetic ﬁeld external

to the toroid.
MAGNETIC CONFINEMENT

We have seen in Section 4.3 (see also the box on helical motion of charged particles earlier
in this chapter) that orbits of charged particles are helical. If the magnetic field is
non-uniform, but does not change much during one circular orbit, then the radius of the
helix will decrease as it enters stronger magnetic ﬁeld and the radius will increase when it
enters weaker magnetic ﬁelds. We consider two solenoids at a distance from each other,
enclosed in an evacuated container (see ﬁgure below where we have not shown the container).
Charged particles moving in the region between the two solenoids will start with a small
radius. The radius will increase as ﬁeld decreases and the radius will decrease again as
ﬁeld due to the second solenoid takes over. The solenoids act as a mirror or reﬂector. [See
the direction of F as the particle approaches coil 2 in the ﬁgure. It has a horizontal component
against the forward motion.] This makes the particles turn back when they approach the
solenoid. Such an arrangement will act like magnetic bottle or magnetic container. The
particles will never touch the sides of the container. Such magnetic bottles are of great use
in confining the high energy plasma in fusion experiments. The plasma will destroy any
other form of material container because of its high temperature. Another useful container
is a toroid. Toroids are expected to play a key role in the tokamak, an equipment for plasma
conﬁnement in fusion power reactors. There is an international collaboration called the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), being set up in France, for
achieving controlled fusion, of which India is a collaborating nation. For details of ITER
collaboration and the project, you may visit htt : www.iter.or .

 

 

153

2019-20