276 PHYSICS

 

APPENDIX 10. 1 : WHAT IS BLOOD PRESSURE ?

In evolutionary history there occurred a time when animals started spending a significant amount
of time in the upright position. This placed a number of demands on the circulatory system. The
venous system that returns blood from the lower extremities to the heart underwent changes. You
will recall that veins are blood vessels through which blood returns to the heart. Humans and
animals such as the giraffe have adapted to the problem of moving blood upward against gravity.
But animals such as snakes, rats and rabbits will die if held upwards, since the blood remains in
the lower extremities and the venous system is unable to move it towards the heart.

26.8 kPa 9.3 kPa 13. kPa
13.3 kPa 13.1 kPa

 

 

Fig. 1 0.26 Schematic view of the gauge pressures in the arteries in various parts of the human body while
standing or lying down. The pressures shown are averaged over a heart cycle.

Figure 10.26 shows the average pressures observed in the arteries at various points in the human body.
Since viscous effects are small, we can use Bernoulli’s equation, Eq. (10.13),

P + éva + pgy = Constant

to understand these pressure values. The kinetic energy term [p v2/2] can be ignored since the velocities in
the three arteries are small (: 0.1 m s4] and almost constant. Hence the gauge pressures at the brain PB,
the heart PH, and the foot PF are related by

PF=PH+ pth=PB+pghB [10.34]

where p is the density of blood.

Typical values of the heights to the heart and the brain are hH = 1.3 m and hB = 1.7m. Taking
p = 1.06 x 103 kg m’3 we obtain that PF = 26.8 kPa (kilopascals) and PB = 9.3 kPa given that PH = 13.3 kPa.
Thus the pressures in the lower and upper parts of the body are so different when a person is standing,
but are almost equal when he is lying down. As mentioned in the text the units for pressure more
commonly employed in medicine and physiology are torr and mm of Hg. 1 mm of Hg = 1 torr = 0.133 kPa.
Thus the average pressure at the heart is PH = 13.3 kPa = 100 mm of Hg.

The human body is a marvel of nature. The veins in the lower extremities are equipped with valves,
which open when blood ﬂows towards the heart and close if it tends to drain down. Also, blood is returned
at least partially by the pumping action associated with breathing and by the ﬂexing of the skeletal muscles
during walking. This explains why a soldier who is required to stand at attention may faint because of
insufficient return of the blood to the heart. Once he is made to lie down, the pressures become equalized
and he regains consciousness.

An instrument called the sphygmomanometer usually measures the blood pressure of humans. It is a
fast, painless and non—invasive technique and gives the doctor a reliable idea about the patients health.
The measurement process is shown in Fig. 10.27. There are two reasons why the upper arm is used. First,
it is at the same level as the heart and measurements here give values close to that at the heart. Secondly,
the upper arm contains a single bone and makes the artery there [called the brachial artery) easy to
compress. We have all measured pulse rates by placing our fingers over the wrist. Each pulse takes a little
less than a second. During each pulse the pressure in the heart and the circulatory system goes through a

2019-20