G RAVITATI ON

189

(2) The force of attraction due to a hollow
spherical shell of uniform density, on a
point mass situated inside it is zero.
Qualitatively, we can again understand this
result. Various regions of the spherical shell
attract the point mass inside it in various
directions. These forces cancel each other
completely.

8.4 THE GRAVITATIONAL CONSTANT

The value of the gravitational constant G
entering the Universal law of gravitation can be
determined experimentally and this was first
done by English scientist Henry Cavendish in
1798. The apparatus used by him is
schematically shown in figure.8.6

 

Fig. 8.6 Schematic drawing of Cavendish’s
experiment. SI and 82 are large spheres
which are kept on either side (shown shades)
of the masses at A and B. When the big
spheres are taken to the other side of the
masses (shown by dotted circles), the bar
AB rotates a little since the torque reverses
direction. The angle of rotation can be
measured experimentally.

The bar AB has two small lead spheres
attached at its ends. The bar is suspended from
a rigid support by a fine wire. Two large lead
spheres are brought close to the small ones but
on opposite sides as shown. The big spheres
attract the nearby small ones by equal and
opposite force as shown. There is no net force
on the bar but only a torque which is clearly
equal to F times the length of the bar,where F is
the force of attraction between a big sphere and

its neighbouring small sphere. Due to this
torque, the suspended wire gets twisted till such
time as the restoring torque of the wire equals
the gravitational torque . If 9 is the angle of twist
of the suspended wire, the restoring torque is
proportional to 9, equal to 10. Where 1' is the
restoring couple per unit angle of twist. 1 can be
measured independently e.g. by applying a
known torque and measuring the angle of twist.
The gravitational force between the spherical
balls is the same as if their masses are
concentrated at their centres. Thus if d is the
separation between the centres of the big and
its neighbouring small ball, M and In their
masses, the gravitational force between the big
sphere and its neighouring small ball is.

Mm
d2 (8'6)

If L is the length of the bar AB , then the
torque arising out of F is F multiplied by L. At
equilibrium, this is equal to the restoring torque
and hence

Mm

2

F=G

 

 

G L=r 6 (8.7)

Observation of 9 thus enables one to

calculate G from this equation.

Since Cavendish’s experiment, the
measurement of G has been refined and the
currently accepted value is

G = 6.67><10‘11 N mZ/kg2 (8.8)

8.5 ACCELERATION DUE TO GRAVITY OF
THE EARTH

The earth can be imagined to be a sphere made
of a large number of concentric spherical shells
with the smallest one at the centre and the
largest one at its surface. A point outside the
earth is obviously outside all the shells. Thus,
all the shells exert a gravitational force at the
point outside just as if their masses are
concentrated at their common centre according
to the result stated in section 8.3. The total mass
of all the shells combined is just the mass of the
earth. Hence, at a point outside the earth, the
gravitational force is just as if its entire mass of
the earth is concentrated at its centre.

For a point inside the earth, the situation
is different. This is illustrated in Fig. 8.7 .

2019-20