I26

PHYSICS

 

unlike the conservative force, Wm depends on
the particular path i to f. 4

6. 10 VARIOUS FORMS OF ENERGY : THE LAW
OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

In the previous section we have discussed
mechanical energy. We have seen that it can be
classified into two distinct categories : one based
on motion, namely kinetic energy; the other on
configuration (position), namely potential energy.
Energy comes in many a forms which transform
into one another in ways which may not often
be clear to us.

6. 10.1 Heat

We have seen that the frictional force is not a
conservative force. However, work is associated
with the force of friction, Example 6.5. A block of
mass m sliding on a rough horizontal surface
with speed v0 comes to a halt over a distance x0.
The work done by the force of kinetic friction f
over x0 is —f x0. By the work-energy theorem

mug/2 = fxo- If we confine our scope to
mechanics, we would say that the kinetic energy
of the block is ‘lost’ due to the frictional force.
On examination of the block and the table we
would detect a slight increase in their
temperatures. The work done by friction is not
‘lost’, but is transferred as heat energy. This
raises the internal energy of the block and the
table. In winter, in order to feel warm, we
generate heat by vigorously rubbing our palms
together. We shall see later that the internal
energy is associated with the ceaseless, often
random, motion of molecules. A quantitative idea
of the transfer of heat energy is obtained by
noting that 1 kg of water releases about 42000 J
of energy when it cools by10 °C.

6. 10.2 Chemical Energy

One of the greatest technical achievements of
humankind occurred when we discovered how
to ignite and control fire. We learnt to rub two
ﬂint stones together (mechanical energy), got
them to heat up and to ignite a heap of dry leaves
(chemical energy), which then provided
sustained warmth. A matchstick ignites into a
bright ﬂame when struck against a specially
prepared chemical surface. The lighted
matchstick, when applied to a firecracker,
results in a spectacular display of sound and
light.

2019-20

Chemical energy arises from the fact that the
molecules participating in the chemical reaction
have different binding energies. A stable chemical
compound has less energy than the separated parts.
A chemical reaction is basically a rearrangement
of atoms. Ifthe total energy of the reactants is more
than the products of the reaction, heat is released
and the reaction is said to be an exothermic
reaction. Ifthe reverse is true, heat is absorbed and
the reaction is endothermic. Coal consists of
carbon and a kilogram of it when burnt releases
about 3 x 107 J of energy.

Chemical energy is associated with the forces
that give rise to the stability of substances. These
forces bind atoms into molecules, molecules into
polymeric chains, etc. The chemical energy
arising from the combustion of coal, cooking gas,
wood and petroleum is indispensable to our daily
existence.

6. 10.3 Electrical Energy

The ﬂow of electrical current causes bulbs to
glow, fans to rotate and bells to ring. There are
laws governing the attraction and repulsion of
charges and currents, which we shall learn
later. Energy is associated with an electric
current. An urban Indian household consumes
about 200 J of energy per second on an average.

6. 10.4 The Equivalence of Mass and Energy

Till the end of the nineteenth century, physicists
believed that in every physical and chemical
process, the mass of an isolated system is
conserved. Matter might change its phase, e.g.
glacial ice could melt into a gushing stream, but
matter is neither created nor destroyed; Albert
Einstein (1 879- 1955) however, showed that mass
and energy are equivalent and are related by
the relation

E = m 02 (6.20)
where c, the speed of light in vacuum is
approximately 3 ><108 m s4. Thus, a staggering
amount of energy is associated with a mere
kilogram of matter

E = 1x (3 X108)2 J = 9 ><1016 J.
This is equivalent to the annual electrical output
of a large (3000 MW) power generating station.

6. 10.5 Nuclear Energy

The most destructive weapons made by man, the
fission and fusion bombs are manifestations of