U N [TS AND M EASU REM EN’I‘

 

2.20 The nearest star to our solar system is 4.29 light years away. How much is this
distance in terms of parsecs? How much parallax would this star (named Alpha
Centauri] show when viewed from two locations of the Earth six months apart in its
orbit around the Sun ?

2.21 Precise measurements of physical quantities are a need of science. For example, to
ascertain the speed of an aircraft, one must have an accurate method to find its
positions at closely separated instants of time. This was the actual motivation behind
the discovery of radar in World War 11. Think of different examples in modern science
where precise measurements of length, time, mass etc. are needed. Also, wherever
you can, give a quantitative idea of the precision needed.

2.22 Just as precise measurements are necessary in science, it is equally important to be
able to make rough estimates of quantities using rudimentary ideas and common
observations. Think of ways by which you can estimate the following [where an
estimate is difficult to obtain, try to get an upper bound on the quantity] :

(a) the total mass of rain—bearing clouds over India during the Monsoon
[b] the mass of an elephant

[c] the wind speed during a storm
(d) the number of strands of hair on your head
[e] the number of air molecules in your classroom.

2.23 The Sun is a hot plasma [ionized matter] with its inner core at a temperature exceeding
107 K, and its outer surface at a temperature of about 6000 K. At these high
temperatures, no substance remains in a solid or liquid phase. In what range do you
expect the mass density of the Sun to be, in the range of densities of solids and
liquids or gases ? Check if your guess is correct from the following data : mass of the
Sun = 2.0 x 1030 kg, radius ofthe Sun = 7.0 x 108 m.

2.24 When the planet Jupiter is at a distance of 824.7 million kilometers from the Earth,
its angular diameter is measured to be 35.72" of arc. Calculate the diameter of
Jupiter.

Additional Exercises

2.25 A man walking briskly in rain with speed 1) must slant his umbrella forward making
an angle 6 with the vertical. A student derives the following relation between 0 and
v : tan 0 = v and checks that the relation has a correct limit: as 1) —>0, 0 —>0, as
expected. We are assuming there is no strong wind and that the rain falls vertically
for a stationary man). Do you think this relation can be correct ? If not, guess the
correct relation.

2.26 It is claimed that two cesium clocks, if allowed to run for 100 years, free from any
disturbance, may differ by only about 0.02 s. What does this imply for the accuracy
of the standard cesium clock in measuring a time—interval of l s ?

2.27 Estimate the average mass density of a sodium atom assuming its size to be about
2.5 A. [Use the known values of Avogadro’s number and the atomic mass of sodium].
Compare it with the mass density of sodium in its crystalline phase : 970 kg m*3. Are
the two densities of the same order of magnitude ? If so, why ?

2.28 The unit of length convenient on the nuclear scale is a fermi : 1 f = 10’15m. Nuclear
sizes obey roughly the following empirical relation :

= 1/3
r r0 A

where r is the radius of the nucleus, A its mass number, and r0 is a constant equal to
about, 1.2 f. Show that the rule implies that nuclear mass density is nearly constant
for different nuclei. Estimate the mass density of sodium nucleus. Compare it with
the average mass density of a sodium atom obtained in Exercise. 2.27.

2.29 A LASER is a source of very intense, monochromatic, and unidirectional beam of
light. These properties of a laser light can be exploited to measure long distances.
The distance of the Moon from the Earth has been already determined very precisely
using a laser as a source of light. A laser light beamed at the Moon takes 2.56 s to

2019-20