26

PHYSICS

 

How will you measure the length of a line?

What a naive question. at this stage. you might
say! But what if it is not a straight line? Draw
a zigzag line in your copy, or on the blackboard.
Well. not too difﬁcult again. You might take a
thread, place it along the line. open up the
thread. and measure its length.

Now imagine that you want to measure the
length of a national highway. 3 river. the railway
track between two stations. or the boundary
between two states or two nations. If you take
a string of length 1 metre or 100 metre, keep it
along the line. shift its position every time. the
arithmetic of man-hours of labour and expenses
on the project is not commensurate with the
outcome. Moreover. errors are bound to occur
in this enormous task. There is an interesting
fact about this. France and Belgium share a
common international boundary. whose length
mentioned in the ofﬁcial documents of the two
countries differs substantially!

Go one step beyond and imagine the
coastline where land meets sea. Roads and rivers
have fairly mild bends as compared to a
coastline. Even so. all documents, including our
school books. contain information on the length
of the coastline of Gujarat or Andhra Pradesh.
or the common boundary between two states.
etc. Railway tickets come with the distance
between stations printed on them. We have
‘milestones‘ all along the roads indicating the
distances to various towns. So, how is it done?

One has to decide how much error one can
tolerate and optimise cost-effectiveness. If you
want smaller errors. it will involve high
technology and high costs. Suﬁice it to say that
it requires fairly advanced level of physics.
mathematics, engineering and technology. It
belongs to the areas of fractals. which has lately
become popular in theoretical physics. Even
then one doesn't know how much to rely on
the figure that props up. as is clear from the
story of France and Belgium. Incidentally. this
story of the FrancevBelgium discrepancy
appears on the ﬁrst page of an advanced Physics
book on the subject of fractals and chaos!

mass density is obtained by deviding mass by
the volume of the substance. If we have errors
in the measurement of mass and of the sizes or
dimensions, we must know what the error will
be in the density of the substance. To make such
estimates, we should learn how errors combine
in various mathematical operations. For this,
we use the following procedure.

2019-20

(a) Error of a sum or a difference

Suppose two physical quantities A and B have
measured values A i AA, B i AB respectively
where AA and AB are their absolute errors. We
wish to find the error AZ in the sum

Z = A + B.
We have by addition, Z i AZ

= (AiAA) + (BiAB).
The maximum possible error in Z

AZ 2 AA + AB
For the difference Z = A — B, we have

ZiAZ= (AiAA)—(BiAB)

=(A—B)iAAiAB

or, i AZ = i AA i AB
The maximum value of the error AZ is again
AA + AB.

Hence the rule : When two quantities are
added or subtracted, the absolute error in the
ﬁnal result is the sum of the absolute errors
in the individual quantities.

Example 2.8 The temperatures of two

bodies measured by a thennometer are
t1: 20 0C i 0.5 0C and t2 = 50 0C i 0.5 0C.

Calculate the temperature difference and
the error theirin.

 

Answer t’ = t2—t1 = (50 0C105 0C)— (200Ci0.5 0C)
t’ = 30 0C i l 0C {
(b) Error of a product or a quotient

Suppose Z = AB and the measured values of A
and B are A 1 AA and B i AB. Then

ZiAZ= (AiAA) (BiAB)
=ABi BAAiAABiAAAB.
Dividing LHS by Z and RHS by AB we have,
li(AZ/ZJ = l i (AA/A) i (AB/B) i (AA/A)(AB/B).

Since AA and AB are small, we shall ignore their
product.

Hence the maximum relative error
AZ/ Z= (AA/A) + (AB/B).

You can easily verify that this is true for division
also.

Hence the rule : When two quantities are
multiplied or divided, the relative error in the
result is the sum of the relative errors in the
multipliers.