Semiconductor Electronics:

Materials, Devices and

Initially, diffusion current is large and drift current is small.
As the diffusion process continues, the space-charge regions
on either side of the junction extend, thus increasing the electric
field strength and hence drift current. This process continues
until the diffusion current equals the drift current. Thus a p-n
junction is formed. In a p-n junction under equilibrium there
is no net current.

The loss of electrons from the n-region and the gain of
electron by the p-region causes a difference of potential across
the junction of the two regions. The polarity of this potential is
such as to oppose further ﬂow of carriers so that a condition of
equilibrium exists. Figure 14.1 1 shows the p-n junction at
equilibrium and the potential across the junction. The
n-material has lost electrons, and p material has acquired
electrons. The n material is thus positive relative to the p
material. Since this potential tends to prevent the movement of
electron from the n region into the p region, it is often called a
barrier potential.

Simple Circuits

9999
9999
p 9999
9999
9999

4—E

11

[a]
j?—
(b)

FIGURE 14.11 (a) Diode under
equilibrium (V = O]. (b) Barrier
potential under no bias.

Example 14.3 Can we take one slab of p-type semiconductor and

physically join it to another n-type semiconductor to get p-n junction? H

Solution NO! Any slab, howsoever ﬂat, will have roughness much 5

larger than the inter-atomic crystal spacing (~2 to 3 A) and hence a

continuous contact at the atomic level will not be possible. The junction 3

will behave as a discontinuity for the ﬂowing charge carriers. 50
14.6 SEMICONDUCTOR DIODE 3%

p 9999 n

A semiconductor diode [Fig. 14.12(a)] is basically a ./7 2% K
p-n junction with metallic contacts provided at the Metfultc 'T‘ . Metallic
ends for the application of an external voltage. It is a con ac £2533)?“ contact

two terminal device. A p-n junction diode is
symbolically represented as shown in Fig. 14.12(b).

The direction of arrow indicates the conventional
direction of current (when the diode is under forward
bias). The equilibrium barrier potential can be altered
by applying an external voltage Vacross the diode.

(a)

._[>i_.

p n
(b)

The situation of p-n junction diode under equilibrium FIGURE 1412 (a) Semiconductor diode.
(without bias) is shown in Fig. 14.1 1(a) and (b). (b) Symbol for p-n junction diode.

14.6.1 p-n junction diode under forward bias

When an external voltage Vis applied across a semiconductor diode such
that p-side is connected to the positive terminal of the battery and n—side
to the negative terminal [Fig. 14.13(a)], it is said to be forward biased.
The applied voltage mostly drops across the depletion region and the
voltage drop across the p-side and n-side of the junction is negligible.
(This is because the resistance of the depletion region — a region where
there are no charges — is very high compared to the resistance of n-side
and p-side.) The direction of the applied voltage (V) is opposite to the

2019-20

479