Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance

(b) To enable them to conduct charge (produced by friction) to the
ground; as too much of static electricity accumulated may result
in spark and result in ﬁre.

(c) Reason similar to (b).

 

((1) Current passes only when there is difference in potential.

2. 10 DIELECTRICS AND POLARISATION

Dielectrics are non-conducting substances. In contrast to conductors,
they have no (or negligible number of) charge carriers. Recall from Section
2.9 what happens when a conductor is placed in an
external electric ﬁeld. The free charge carriers move
and charge distribution in the conductor adjusts
itself in such a way that the electric ﬁeld due to
induced charges opposes the external field within
the conductor. This happens until, in the static
situation, the two ﬁelds cancel each other and the
net electrostatic ﬁeld in the conductor is zero. In a
dielectric, this free movement of charges is not
possible. It turns out that the external ﬁeld induces
dipole moment by stretching or re-orienting
molecules of the dielectric. The collective effect of all
the molecular dipole moments is net charges on the
surface of the dielectric which produce a ﬁeld that
opposes the external ﬁeld. Unlike in a conductor,
however, the opposing field so induced does not
exactly cancel the external ﬁeld. It only reduces it.
The extent of the effect depends on the
nature of the dielectric. To understand the
effect, we need to look at the charge . _ _
distribution of a dielectric at the Non-Polar g ‘-
molecular level. "
The molecules of a substance may be
polar or non-polar. In a non-polar
molecule, the centres of positive and
negative charges coincide. The molecule
then has no permanent (or intrinsic) dipole
moment. Examples of non-polar molecules
are oxygen (02) and hydrogen (H2) .
molecules which, because of their polar
symmetry, have no dipole moment. On the I
other hand, a polar molecule is one in which _ 7 7 7
the centres of positive and negative charges H01
are separated (even when there is no
external field). Such molecules have a
permanent dipole moment. An ionic
molecule such as HCl or a molecule of water
(H20) are examples of polar molecules. 7 1

 

Dielectric

FIGURE 2.20 Difference in behaviour
of a conductor and a dielectric
in an external electric field.

 

   

FIGURE 2.21 Some examples of polar
and non-polar molecules.

2019-20