496

i Physics

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

 

There are two distinct band of energies [called valence band and
conduction band] in which the electrons in a material lie. Valence
band energies are low as compared to conduction band energies. AH
energy levels in the valence band are filled while energy levels in the
conduction band may be fully empty or partially filled. The electrons in
the conduction band are free to move in a solid and are responsible for
the conductivity. The extent of conductivity depends upon the energy
gap [E9] between the top of valence band (EV) and the bottom of the
conduction band EC. The electrons from valence band can be excited by
heat, light or electrical energy to the conduction band and thus, produce
a change in the current ﬂowing in a semiconductor.

For insulators Eg> 3 eV, for semiconductors Eg is 0.2 eV to 3 eV, while
for metals Eg z 0.

p—n junction is the ‘key’ to all semiconductor devices. When such a
junction is made. a ‘depletion layer’ is formed consisting of immobile
ion—cores devoid of their electrons or holes. This is responsible for a
junction potential barrier.

By changing the external applied voltage, junction barriers can be
changed. In forward bias (n-side is connected to negative terminal of the
battery and p—side is connected to the positive), the barrier is decreased
while the barrier increases in reverse bias. Hence, forward bias current
is more [mA] while it is very small [11A] in a p-n junction diode.

Diodes can be used for rectifying an ac voltage (restricting the ac voltage
to one direction). With the help of a capacitor or a suitable filter, a dc
voltage can be obtained.

There are some special purpose diodes.

Zener diode is one such special purpose diode. In reverse bias, after a
certain voltage. the current suddenly increases [breakdown voltage] in
a Zener diode. This property has been used to obtain voltage regulation

p—n junctions have also been used to obtain many photonic or
optoelectronic devices where one of the participating entity is ‘photon’:
(a) Photodiodes in which photon excitation results in a change of reverse
saturation current which helps us to measure light intensity; (b) Solar
cells which convert photon energy into electricity; [c] Light Emitting
Diode and Diode Laser in which electron excitation by a bias voltage
results in the generation of light.

There are some special circuits which handle the digital data consisting
of 0 and 1 levels. This forms the subject of Digital Electronics.

The important digital circuits performing special logic operations are
called logic gates. These are: OR, AND, NOT, NAND. and NOR gates.

POINTS TO PONDER

The energy bands (EC or EV) in the semiconductors are space delocalised
which means that these are not located in any specific place inside the
solid. The energies are the overall averages. When you see a picture in
which EC or EV are drawn as straight lines, then they should be
respectively taken simply as the bottom of conduction band energy levels
and top of valence band energy levels.

In elemental semiconductors (Si or Ge), the n—type or p—type
semiconductors are obtained by introducing ‘dopants’ as defects. In
compound semiconductors, the change in relative stoichiometric ratio
can also change the type of semiconductor. For example. in ideal GaAs

2019-20