MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS 237
—

Robert Hooke
(1635 - 1703 A.D.)

Robert Hooke was born on July 18. 1635 in Freshwater. Isle of Wight. He was
one of the most brilliant and versatile seventeenth century English scientists.
He attended Oxford University but never graduated. Yet he was an extremely
talented inventor. instrument—maker and building designer. He assisted Robert
Boyle in the construction of Boylean air pump. In 1662. he was appointed as
Curator of Experiments to the newly founded Royal Society. In 1665. he became
Professor of Geometry in Gresham College where he carried out his astronomi—
cal observations. He built a Gregorian reﬂecting telescope: discovered the fifth
star in the trapezium and an asterism in the constellation Orion: suggested that
Jupiter rotates on its axis; plotted detailed sketches of Mars which were later
used in the 19111 century to determine the planet’s rate of rotation: stated the
inverse square law to describe planetary motion, which Newton modified later
etc. He was elected Fellow of Royal Society and also served as the Society's
Secretary from 1667 to 1682. In his series of observations presented in Micrographia. he suggested
wave theory of light and first used the word ‘cell‘ in a biological context as a result of his studies of cork.

Robert Hooke is best known to physicists for his discovery of law of elasticity: Ut tensio, sic vis [This
is a Latin expression and it means as the distortion. so the force). This law laid the basis for studies of

stress and strain and for understanding the elastic materials.

As a result of applied tangential force, there
is a relative displacement Ax between opposite
faces of the cylinder as shown in the Fig. 9.2(b).
The strain so produced is known as shearing
strain and it is defined as the ratio of relative
displacement of the faces Ax to the length of
the cylinder L.

Ax

Shearing strain = T = tan 0 (9.3)

where 0 is the angular displacement of the
cylinder from the vertical (original position of
the cylinder). Usually 0 is very small, tan 0
is nearly equal to angle 0, (if 0 = 10°, for
example, there is only 1% difference between 6
and tan 9).

k—h—>l

(a) (b)

 

 

It can also be visualised, when a book is
pressed with the hand and pushed horizontally,
as shown in Fig. 9.2 (c).

Thus, shearing strain = tan (9 z 0 (9.4)

In Fig. 9.2 (d), a solid sphere placed in the
ﬂuid under high pressure is compressed
uniformly on all sides. The force applied by the
ﬂuid acts in perpendicular direction at each
point of the surface and the body is said to be
under hydraulic compression. This leads to
decrease in its volume without any change of
its geometrical shape.

The body develops internal restoring forces
that are equal and opposite to the forces applied
by the ﬂuid (the body restores its original shape
and size when taken out from the ﬂuid). The
internal restoring force per unit area in this case

K

{C} (d)

Fig. 9.2 (aJA cylindrical body under tensile stress elongates by AL (b) Shearing stress on a cylinder deforming it by
an angle 9 (c) A body subjected to shearing stress (d) A solid body under a stress normal to the surface at
every point (hydraulic stress). The volumetric strain is AV/ V, but there is no change in shape.

2019-20