Wove Optics

 

(In each operation, take all parameters, other than the one specified,
to remain unchanged.)

Solution

(61)

(b)

(C)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Angular separation of the fringes remains constant
(= xi/d). The actual separation of the fringes increases in
proportion to the distance of the screen from the plane of the
two slits.

The separation of the fringes (and also angular separation)
decreases. See, however, the condition mentioned in (d) below.

The separation of the fringes (and also angular separation)
decreases. See, however, the condition mentioned in ((1) below.

Let s be the size of the source and S its distance from the plane of
the two slits. For interference fringes to be seen, the condition
s/S < M d should be satisfied; otherwise, interference patterns
produced by different parts of the source overlap and no fringes
are seen. Thus, as S decreases (i.e., the source slit is brought
closer), the interference pattern gets less and less sharp, and
when the source is brought too close for this condition to be valid,
the fringes disappear. Till this happens, the fringe separation
remains fixed.

Same as in (d). As the source slit width increases, fringe pattern
gets less and less sharp. When the source slit is so Wide that the
condition 3/8 S X/d is not satisfied, the interference pattern
disappears.

The interference patterns due to different component colours of
white light overlap (incoherently). The central bright fringes for
different colours are at the same position. Therefore, the central
fringe is ”white. For a point P for which SZP —SIP = 7‘12/ 2, where 7‘1:
(z 4000 A) represents the wavelength for the blue colour, the blue
component will be absent and the fringe will appear red in colour.
Slightly farther away where 829—819 = 7‘1; = 7»/ 2 where Kr (22 8000 A)
is the wavelength for the red colour, the fringe will be predominantly
blue.

Thus, the fringe closest on either side of the central white fringe
is red and the farthest will appear blue. After a few fringes, no
clear fringe pattern is seen.

10.6 DIFFRACTION

If we look clearly at the shadow cast by an opaque object, close to the
region of geometrical shadow, there are alternate dark and bright regions
just like in interference. This happens due to the phenomenon of
diffraction. Diffraction is a general characteristic exhibited by all types of
waves, be it sound waves, light waves, water waves or matter waves. Since
the wavelength of light is much smaller than the dimensions of most
obstacles; we do not encounter diffraction effects of light in everyday
observations. However, the ﬁnite resolution of our eye or of optical

2019-20

f'OI snmvxq

367