MOTION IN A PLANE 85
—

POINTS TO PONDER

l. The path length traversed by an object between two points is. in general. not the same as
the magnitude of displacement. The displacement depends only on the end points; the
path length (as the name implies) depends on the actual path. The two quantities are
equal only if the object does not change its direction during the course of motion. In all
other cases. the path length is greater than the magnitude of displacement.

2. In View of point 1 above. the average speed of an object is greater than or equal to the
magnitude of the average velocity over a given time interval. The two are equal only if the
path length is equal to the magnitude of displacement.

3. The vector equations [4.3321] and (4.34a) do not involve any choice of axes. Of course,
you can always resolve them along any two independent axes.

4. The kinematic equations for uniform acceleration do not apply to the case of uniform
circular motion since in this case the magnitude of acceleration is constant but its
direction is changing.

5. An object subjected to two velocities v1 and v2 has a resultant velocity v = vl + v2. Take
care to distinguish it from velocity of object 1 relative to velocity of object 2 : v1.2: vl — v2.
Here v1 and v2 are velocities with reference to some common reference frame.

6. The resultant acceleration of an object in circular motion is towards the centre only if
the speed is constant.

7. The shape of the trajectory of the motion of an object. is not determined by the acceleration
alone but also depends on the initial conditions of motion [ initial position and initial
velocity). For example. the trajectory of an object moving under the same acceleration
due to gravity can be a straight line or a parabola depending on the initial conditions.

 

 

EXERCISES

4.1 State, for each of the following physical quantities. if it is a scalar or a vector :
volume, mass, speed, acceleration, density, number of moles, velocity, angular
frequency, displacement, angular velocity.

4.2 Pick out the two scalar quantities in the following list :
force, angular momentum, work, current, linear momentum, electric field, average
velocity, magnetic moment, relative velocity.

4.3 Pick out the only vector quantity in the following list :
Temperature, pressure, impulse, time, power, total path length, energy, gravitational
potential, coefficient of friction, charge.

4.4 State with reasons, whether the following algebraic operations with scalar and vector
physical quantities are meaningful :

(a) adding any two scalars, (b) adding a scalar to a vector of the same dimensions ,
[c] multiplying any vector by any scalar, (d) multiplying any two scalars, (e) adding any
two vectors, (f) adding a component of a vector to the same vector.

4.5 Read each statement below carefully and state with reasons, if it is true or false :
(a) The magnitude of a vector is always a scalar, (b) each component of a vector is
always a scalar, (c) the total path length is always equal to the magnitude of the
displacement vector of a particle. (d) the average speed of a particle (defined as total
path length divided by the time taken to cover the path) is either greater or equal to
the magnitude of average velocity of the particle over the same interval of time, (e)
Three vectors not lying in a plane can never add up to give a null vector.

4.6 Establish the following vector inequalities geometrically or otherwise :
(a) |a+b| < Ial + |b|

(b) |a+b|3 IIaI—Ibll

2019-20