Electromagnetic
Induction

a plane of area A placed in a uniform magnetic field B (Fig. 6.4) can
be written as

(DB =B-A=BAcos6 (6.1)

where 0 is angle between B and A. The notion of the area as a vector
has been discussed earlier in Chapter 1. Equation (6.1) can be
extended to curved surfaces and nonuniform fields.

If the magnetic field has different magnitudes and directions at
various parts of a surface as shown in Fig. 6.5, then the magnetic
ﬂux through the surface is given by

qu =Bl.dA1+BQ.dA2+---=ZBi.dAi (6.2)
all

where ‘all’ stands for summation over all the area elements dAi

FIGURE 6.4 A plane of
surface area A placed in a

comprising the surface and Bi is the magnetic ﬁeld at the area element uniform] magnetic ﬁeld B.

dAi. The SI unit of magnetic ﬂux is weber (Wb) or tesla meter
squared (T m2). Magnetic ﬂux is a scalar quantity.

6.4 FARADAY’S LAW OF INDUCTION

From the experimental observations, Faraday arrived at a
conclusion that an emf is induced in a coil when magnetic ﬂux
through the coil changes with time. Experimental observations
discussed in Section 6.2 can be explained using this concept.
The motion of a magnet towards or away from coil C1 in
Experiment 6.1 and moving a current-carrying coil C2 towards
or away from coil C1 in Experiment 6.2, change the magnetic
ﬂux associated with coil CI. The change in magnetic ﬂux induces
emf in coil Cl. It was this induced emf which caused electric

 

current to ﬂow in coil C1 and through the galvanometer. A FIGURE 6.5 Magnetic field B.
plausible explanation for the observations of Experiment 6.3 is at the 1"“ area €1€ment~ dA,
as follows: When the tapping key K is pressed, the current in “Presents area VCCtor 0f the

coil C2 (and the resulting magnetic field) rises from zero to a
maximum value in a short time. Consequently, the magnetic

ﬂux through the neighbouring coil C1 also increases. It is the change in
magnetic ﬂux through coil C1 that produces an induced emf in coil C1.
When the key is held pressed, current in coil C2 is constant. Therefore,
there is no change in the magnetic ﬂux through coil C1 and the current in
coil C1 drops to zero. When the key is released, the current in C2 and the
resulting magnetic field decreases from the maximum value to zero in a
short time. This results in a decrease in magnetic ﬂux through coil C1
and hence again induces an electric current in coil 01*. The common
point in all these observations is that the time rate of change of magnetic
ﬂux through a circuit induces emf in it. Faraday stated experimental
observations in the form of a law called Faraday ’3 law of electromagnetic
induction. The law is stated below.

* Note that sensitive electrical instruments in the vicinity of an electromagnet
can be damaged due to the induced emfs [and the resulting currents] when the
electromagnet is turned on or off.

2019-20

1"“ area element.

207