404

 

 

l Physics

http://www.nobelprizc.org/nobeLprich/physics/laureates/l 986/presentalion—speech.html

Development of electron microscope

by applying suitable potential/voltage from a high voltage power supply
(H.T. or battery). They are made to pass through a cylinder with fine
holes along its axis, producing a fine collimated beam. The beam is made
to fall on the surface of a nickel crystal. The electrons are scattered in all
directions by the atoms of the crystal. The intensity of the electron beam,
scattered in a given direction, is measured by the electron detector
(collector). The detector can be moved on a circular scale and is connected
to a sensitive galvanometer, which records the current. The deﬂection of
the galvanometer is proportional to the intensity of the electron beam
entering the collector. The apparatus is enclosed in an evacuated chamber.
By moving the detector on the circular scale at different positions, the
intensity of the scattered electron beam is measured for different values
of angle of scattering 0 which is the angle between the incident and the
scattered electron beams. The variation of the intensity (I) of the scattered
electrons with the angle of scattering 0 is obtained for different accelerating
voltages.

The experiment was performed by varying the accelarating voltage
from 44 V to 68 V. It was noticed that a strong peak appeared in the
intensity (I) of the scattered electron for an accelarating voltage of 54V at
a scattering angle 6 = 50°

The appearance of the peak in a particular direction is due to the
constructive interference of electrons scattered from different layers of the
regularly spaced atoms of the crystals. From the electron diffraction
measurements, the wavelength of matter waves was found to be
0.165 nm.

The de Broglie wavelength 2. associated with electrons, using
Eq. (1 1.1 1), for V= 54 V is given by

1 227

JV

 

A=h/p= nm

2. 1 227 O 167
= nm = . nm
\/54

 

Thus, there is an excellent agreement between the theoretical value
and the experimentally obtained value of de Broglie wavelength. Davisson-
Gerrner experiment thus strikingly conﬁrms the wave nature of electrons
and the de Broglie relation. More recently, in 1989, the wave nature of a
beam of electrons was experimentally demonstrated in a double-slit
experiment, similar to that used for the wave nature of light. Also, in an
experiment in 1994, interference fringes were obtained with the beams of
iodine molecules, which are about a million times more massive than
electrons.

The de Broglie hypothesis has been basic to the development of modern
quantum mechanics. It has also led to the ﬁeld of electron optics. The
wave properties of electrons have been utilised in the design of electron
microscope which is a great improvement, with higher resolution, over
the optical microscope.

2019-20