charges, but also the time rate of change of electric ﬁeld. More
precisely, the total current iis the sum of the conduction current
denoted by is, and the displacement current denoted by iCl (= 80 (chE/
i(t) dt)). So we have
ddSE

dt

In explicit terms, this means that outside the capacitor plates,
we have only conduction current iC = i, and no displacement
(a) current, i.e., i d = 0. On the other hand, inside the capacitor, there is
no conduction current, i.e., iC = O, and there is only displacement
current, so that i d: i.

The generalised (and correct) Ampere’s circuital law has the same
form as Eq. (8.1), with one difference: “the total current passing
through any surface of which the closed loop is the perimeter” is
the sum of the conduction current and the displacement current.
The generalised law is

 

i=ic+id =ic+£0 (85)

 

 

(8.6)

and is known as Ampere-Maxwell law.

In all respects, the displacement current has the same physical
effects as the conduction current. In some cases, for example, steady
electric fields in a conducting wire, the displacement current may
be zero since the electric ﬁeld E does not change with time. In other

 

FIGURE 8-2 (a) The cases, for example, the charging capacitor above, both conduction
f‘lecmc and magne‘lc and displacement currents may be present in different regions of
ﬁelds E and B between space. In most of the cases, they both may be present in the same

the capacitor plates. at
the point M. (b) A cross
sectional View of Fig. (21).

region of space, as there exist no perfectly conducting or perfectly
insulating medium. Most interestingly, there may be large regions
of space where there is no conduction current, but there is only a
displacement current due to time-varying electric fields. In such a
region, we expect a magnetic field, though there is no (conduction)
current source nearby! The prediction of such a displacement current
can be verified experimentally. For example, a magnetic field (say at point
M) between the plates of the capacitor in Fig. 8.2(a) can be measured and
is seen to be the same as that just outside (at P).

The displacement current has (literally) far reaching consequences.
One thing we immediately notice is that the laws of electricity and
magnetism are now more symmetrical*. Faraday’s law of induction states
that there is an induced emf equal to the rate of change of magnetic ﬂux.
Now, since the emf between two points 1 and 2 is the work done per unit
charge in taking it from 1 to 2, the existence of an emf implies the existence
of an electric field. So, we can rephrase Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction by saying that a magnetic ﬁeld, changing with time, gives rise
to an electric ﬁeld. Then, the fact that an electric ﬁeld changing with
time gives rise to a magnetic ﬁeld, is the symmetrical counterpart, and is

* They are still not perfectly symmetrical; there are no known sources of magnetic
field (magnetic monopoles) analogous to electric charges which are sources of
electric field.

272

2019-20