Wove Optics

 

where 0 is the angle between pass axes of P1 and P2. Since P1 and P3
are crossed the angle between the pass axes of P2 and P3 will be
(15/ 2—9). Hence the intensity of light emerging from P3 will be

I = Iocos26 cos2 [3 — t9)

= IO cos20 sings =(IO/ 4) sin220

Therefore, the transmitted intensity will be maximum when 9 = 15/ 4.

10.7. 1 Polarisation by scattering

The light from a clear blue portion of the sky shows a rise and fall of
intensity when viewed through a polaroid which is rotated. This is nothing
but sunlight, which has changed its direction (having been scattered) on
encountering the molecules of the earth’s atmosphere. As Fig. 10.23(a)
shows, the incident sunlight is unpolarised. The dots stand for polarisation
perpendicular to the plane of the figure. The double arrows show
polarisation in the plane of the ﬁgure. (There is no phase relation between
these two in unpolarised light). Under the inﬂuence of the electric ﬁeld of
the incident wave the electrons in the molecules acquire components of
motion in both these directions. We have drawn an observer looking at
90° to the direction of the sun. Clearly, charges accelerating parallel to
the double arrows do not radiate energy towards this observer since their
acceleration has no transverse component. The radiation scattered by
the molecule is therefore represented by dots. It is polarised
perpendicular to the plane of the ﬁgure. This explains the polarisation of
scattered light from the sky.

Incident sunlight
(Unpolarised)
Incident Reﬂected

yll/
7.
//|\\

     

Scattered Light
(Polarised)

Refracted

MEDIUM §
To Observer
(a) (b)

FIGURE 10.23 (a) Polarisation of the blue scattered light from the sky.
The incident sunlight is unpolarised (dots and arrows). A typical
molecule is shown. It scatters light by 900 polarised normal to
the plane of the paper (dots only). (b) Polarisation of light
reﬂected from a transparent medium at the Brewster angle
(reﬂected ray perpendicular to refracted ray).

The scattering of light by molecules was intensively investigated by
CV. Raman and his collaborators in Kolkata in the 1920s. Raman was
awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1930 for this work.

2019-20

8'01 EI’IJWVXﬂ

379