Moving Charges and

 

Magnetism
Fm = 1b LBa
I I
= ﬂ; wad” L (4.23)

It is of course possible to compute the force on ‘a’ due to ‘b’. From
considerations similar to above we can ﬁnd the force Fab, on a segment of
length L of ‘a’ due to the current in ‘b’. It is equal in magnitude to Fba,
and directed towards ‘b’. Thus,

Fba = —Fab (4 ' 24)

Note that this is consistent with Newton’s third Law. Thus, at least for
parallel conductors and steady currents, we have shown that the
Biot—Savart law and the Lorentz force yield results in accordance with
Newton’s third Law*.

We have seen from above that currents ﬂowing in the same direction
attract each other. One can show that oppositely directed currents repel
each other. Thus,

Parallel currents attract, and antiparallel currents repel.

This rule is the opposite of what we find in electrostatics. Like (same
sign) charges repel each other, but like (parallel) currents attract each
other.

Let jga represent the magnitude of the force Fba per unit length. Then,
from Eq. (4.23),

 

#01 a1 b
fba _ 2 1: d

The above expression is used to deﬁne the ampere (A), which is one
of the seven SI base units.

The ampere is the value of that steady current which, when maintained
in each of the two very long, straight, parallel conductors of negligible
cross-section, and placed one metre apart in vacuum, would produce
on each of these conductors a force equal to 2 X 10‘7 newtons per metre
of length.

This deﬁnition of the ampere was adopted in 1946. It is a theoretical
definition. In practice, one must eliminate the effect of the earth’s magnetic
field and substitute very long wires by multiturn coils of appropriate
geometries. An instrument called the current balance is used to measure
this mechanical force.

The SI unit of charge, namely, the coulomb, can now be defined in
terms of the ampere.

When a steady current of 1A is set up in a conductor, the quantity of
charge that ﬂows through its cross-section in ls is one coulomb (10).

(4.25)

* It turns out that when we have time—dependent currents and/ or charges in
motion, Newton’s third law may not hold for forces between charges and/ or
conductors. An essential consequence of the Newton’s third law in mechanics
is conservation of momentum of an isolated system. This, however, holds even
for the case of time—dependent situations with electromagnetic fields, provided
the momentum carried by fields is also taken into account. 155

2019-20