Current
Electricity

We also observe that since Vis the potential difference across R, we
have from Ohm’s law

 

V=I R (3.58)
Combining Eqs. (3.57) and (3.58), we get
I R = 8—1 r
8
Or, I: (3.59)
R + r

The maximum current that can be drawn from a cell is for R = O and
it is [max = 8/ r. However, in most cells the maximum allowed current is
much lower than this to prevent permanent damage to the cell.

CHARGES m CLOUDS

In olden days lightning was considered as an atmospheric ﬂash of supernatural origin.
It was believed to be the great weapon of Gods. But today the phenomenon of lightning
can be explained scientiﬁcally by elementary principles of physics.

Atmospheric electricity arises due to the separation of electric charges. In the
ionosphere and magnetosphere strong electric current is generated from the solar-
terrestrial interaction. In the lower atmosphere, the current is weaker and is maintained
by thunderstorm.

There are ice particles in the clouds, which grow, collide, fracture and break apart.
The smaller particles acquire positive charge and the larger ones negative charge. These
charged particles get separated by updrifts in the clouds and gravity. The upper portion
of the cloud becomes positively charged and the middle negatively charged, leading to
dipole structure. Sometimes a very weak positive charge is found near the base of the
cloud. The ground is positively charged at the time of thunderstorm development. Also,
cosmic and radioactive radiations ionise air into positive and negative ions and the air
becomes (weakly) electrically conductive. The separation of charges produce tremendous
amount of electrical potential within the cloud, as well, as between the cloud and ground.
This can amount to millions of volts and eventually the electrical resistance in the air
breaks down and lightning ﬂash begins and thousands of amperes of current ﬂows. The
electric field is of the order of 105 V/ m. A lightning ﬂash is composed of a series of
strokes with an average of about four and the duration of each ﬂash is about 30 seconds.
The average peak power per stroke is about 1012 watts.

During fair weather also there is charge in the atmosphere. The fair weather electric
field arises due to the em'stence of a surface charge density at ground and an atmospheric
conductivity, as well as, due to the ﬂow of current from the ionosphere to the earth’s
surface, which is of the order of picoampere / square metre. The surface charge density
at ground is negative; the electric field is directed downward. Over land the average
electric field is about 120 V/ m, which corresponds to a surface charge density of
—1.2 X 10‘9 C / m2. Over the entire earth’s surface, the total negative charge amount to
about 600 kC. An equal positive charge exists in the atmosphere. This electric field is not
noticeable in daily life. The reason why it is not noticed is that virtually everything, including
our bodies, is conductor compared to air. ‘

111

2019-20