144

PHYSICS

axis of rotation of such a fan has an oscillating
(sidewise) movement in a horizontal plane about
the vertical through the point at which the axis
is pivoted (point 0 in Fig. 7 .5(b)).

While the fan rotates and its axis moves
sidewise, this point is fixed. Thus, in more
general cases of rotation, such as the rotation
of a top or a pedestal fan, one point and not
one line, of the rigid body is fixed. In this case
the axis is not fixed, though it always passes
through the fixed point. In our study, however,
we mostly deal with the simpler and special case
of rotation in which one line (i.e. the axis) is ﬁxed.

 

Fig. 7.6(a) Motion of a rigid body which is pure
translation.

 

Fig. 7.6(b) Motion of a rigid body which is a
combination of translation and
rotation.

Fig 7.6 (a) and 7.6 (b) illustrate different motions of
the same body. Note P is an arbitrary point of the
body; 0 is the centre of mass of the body, which is
deﬁned in the next section. Sufﬁce to say here that
the trajectories of O are the translational trajectories
Trl and Tr2 of the body. The positions 0 and P at
three different instants of time are shown by 01, 02,
and 03, and P1, P2 and P3, respectively, in both
Figs. 7.6 (a) and (b) . As seenfrom Fig. 7.6(a), at any
instant the velocities of any particles like 0 and P of
the body are the same in pure translation. Notice, in
this case the orientation of OP, i. e. the angle OP makes
with a fixed direction, say the horizontal, remains
the same, i.e. a1 = a2 = a3. Fig. 7.6 (b) illustrates a
case of combination of translation and rotation. In
this case, at any instants the velocities of O and P
differ. Also, (11, a2 and as may all be different.

2019-20

Thus, for us rotation will be about a fixed axis
only unless stated otherwise.

The rolling motion of a cylinder down an
inclined plane is a combination of rotation about
a fixed axis and translation. Thus, the
‘something else’ in the case of rolling motion
which we referred to earlier is rotational motion.
You will find Fig. 7 .6(a) and (b) instructive from
this point of view. Both these figures show
motion of the same body along identical
translational trajectory. In one case, Fig. 7 .6(a),
the motion is a pure translation; in the other
case [Fig. 7.6(b)] it is a combination of
translation and rotation. (You may try to
reproduce the two types of motion shown, using
a rigid object like a heavy book.)

We now recapitulate the most important
observations of the present section: The motion
of a rigid body which is not pivoted or ﬁxed in
some way is either a pure translation or a
combination of translation and rotation. The
motion of a rigid body which is pivoted or ﬁxed
in some way is rotation. The rotation may be
about an axis that is fixed (e.g. a ceiling fan) or
moving (e. g. an oscillating table fan [Fig.7 .5(b)]).
We shall, in the present chapter, consider
rotational motion about a fixed axis only.

7.2 CENTRE OF MASS

We shall first see what the centre of mass of a
system of particles is and then discuss its
significance. For simplicity we shall start with
a two particle system. We shall take the line

joining the two particles to be the x— axis.

 

Fig. 7.7

Let the distances of the two particles be x1
and x2 respectively from some origin 0. Let m1
and m2 be respectively the masses of the two