188

PHYSICS

(b) Now if the mass at vertex A is doubled
then

= GZITILZm j : 4G1’1’12j:
F53 = FGB and FCC = FGC
Fl? 2 FéA + F63 + Foo
F1; =2Gm2j 4
For the gravitational force between an extended
object (like the earth) and a point mass, Eq. (8.5) is not

directly applicable. Each point mass in the extended
object will exert a force on the given point mass and

F51;

 

Fig. 8.5 Three equal masses are placed at the three these force will not all be in the e 1' tion We

rtic the A ABC. A 2 ' l d
2: theeieiftroid G. mass m LS p ace have to add up these forces vecton'ally for all the point

masses in the extended object to get the total force.
This is easily done using calculus. For two special
FGA = j cases, a simple law results when you do that :

(1) The force of attraction between a hollow
) A - spherical shell of uniform density and a
FGB = — (—i cos 30" — j sin 30”) point mass situated outside is just as if
the entire mass of the shell is

Gm (2m) concentrated at the centre of the shell.

FGC Z 1 (+i COS 3‘00 ‘j sin 300) Qualitatively this can be understood as
From the principle of superposition and the law fOH9WS: GrfWitaﬁonal forces caused by the
of vector addition, the resultant gravitational vanous regions ofthe shell have components
force FR on (2m) is along the line joining the point mass to the

FR = FGA + Fog + Foc centre as well as along a direction

Alternatively, one expects on the basis of
symmetry that the resultant force ought to be

ZCFO .

2 i. 2 : o i. ' o prependicular to this line. The components
FR 2 ZGm J + 2Gm (‘1 COS 30 _J s1n 30 ) prependicular to this line cancel out when

+ 2Gm2( i cos 300 _ 3 sin 300) = 0 summing over all regions of the shell leaving
only a resultant force along the line joining
the point to the centre. The magnitude of
this force works out to be as stated above.

Newton's Principia

 

Kepler had formulated his third law by 1619. The announcement of the underlying universal law of
gravitation came about seventy years later with the publication in 1687 of Newton‘s masterpiece
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematics, often simply called the Principia.

Around 1685, Edmund Halley [after whom the famous Halley's comet is named). came to visit
Newton at Cambridge and asked him about the nature of the trajectory of a body moving under the
inﬂuence of an inverse square law. Without hesitation Newton replied that it had to be an ellipse.
and further that he had worked it out long ago around 1665 when he was forced to retire to his farm
house from Cambridge on account of a plague outbreak. Unfortunately. Newton had lost his papers.
Halley prevailed upon Newton to produce his work in book form and agreed to bear the cost of
publication. Newton accomplished this feat in eighteen months of superhuman effort. The Principia
is a singular scientiﬁc masterpiece and in the words of Lagrange it is “the greatest production of the
human mind.“ The Indian born astrophysicist and Nobel laureate S. Chandrasekhar spent ten years
writing a treatise on the Principia. His book. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader brings
into sharp focus the beauty. clarity and breath taking economy of Newton‘s methods.

 

 

2019-20