LAWS OF MOTION

lOl

 

since we are talking of uncharged and non-
magnetic bodies in mechanics. At the microscopic
level, all bodies are made of charged constituents
(nuclei and electrons) and the various contact
forces arising due to elasticity of bodies, molecular
collisions and impacts, etc. can ultimately be
traced to the electrical forces between the charged
constituents of different bodies. The detailed
microscopic origin of these forces is, however,
complex and not useful for handling problems in
mechanics at the macroscopic scale. This is why
they are treated as different types of forces with
their characteristic properties determined
empirically.

5.9. 1 Friction

Let us return to the example of a body of mass m
at rest on a horizontal table. The force of gravity
(mg) is cancelled by the normal reaction force
(N) of the table. Now suppose a force Fis applied
horizontally to the body. We know from
experience that a small applied force may not
be enough to move the body. But if the applied
force Fwere the only external force on the body,
it must move with acceleration F/ m, however
small. Clearly, the body remains at rest because
some other force comes into play in the
horizontal direction and opposes the applied
force F, resulting in zero net force on the body.
This force fS parallel to the surface of the body in
contact with the table is known as frictional
force, or simply friction (Fig. 5.10(a)). The
subscript stands for static friction to distinguish
it from kinetic friction fk that we consider later
(Fig. 5.10(b)). Note that static friction does not

 

(a) (b)

Fig. 5.10 Static and sliding friction: (a) Impending
motion of the body is opposed by static
friction. When external force exceeds the
maximum limit of static friction, the body
begins to move. (b) Once the body is in
motion, it is subject to sliding or kinetic friction
which opposes relative motion between the
two surfaces in contact. Kinetic friction is
usually less than the maximum value of static

friction.

exist by itself. When there is no applied force,
there is no static friction. It comes into play the
moment there is an applied force. As the applied
force F increases, fS also increases, remaining
equal and opposite to the applied force (up to a
certain limit), keeping the body at rest. Hence, it
is called static friction. Static friction opposes
impending motion. The term impending motion
means motion that would take place (but does
not actually take place) under the applied force,
if friction were absent.

We know from experience that as the applied
force exceeds a certain limit, the body begins to

move. It is found experimentally that the limiting

value of static friction (f5 )max is independent of

the area of contact and varies with the normal
force (N) approximately as :

(fs )m = MN (513)

where us is a constant of proportionality
depending only on the nature of the surfaces in
contact. The constant [.15 is called the coefficient
of static friction. The law of static friction may
thus be written as

fs 3 [.15 N (5.14)

If the applied force F exceeds (f5 )max the body

begins to slide on the surface. It is found
experimentally that when relative motion has
started, the frictional force decreases from the

static maximum value (fs )max . Frictional force

that opposes relative motion between surfaces
in contact is called kinetic or sliding friction and
is denoted by fk . Kinetic friction, like static
friction, is found to be independent of the area
of contact. Further, it is nearly independent of
the velocity. It satisfies a law similar to that for
static friction:

fk 2 #kN (5.15)

where pk the coefficient of kinetic friction,
depends only on the surfaces in contact. As
mentioned above, experiments show that pk is
less than [.15. When relative motion has begun,
the acceleration of the body according to the
second law is ( F —fk )/ m. For a body moving with
constant velocity, F =fk. If the applied force on
the body is removed, its acceleration is — fk / m
and it eventually comes to a stop.

The laws of friction given above do not have
the status of fundamental laws like those for
gravitational, electric and magnetic forces. They

are empirical relations that are only

2019-20