MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

 

Answer Here h= 1000m and p = 1.03 x 103kgm'3.
(a) From Eq. (10.6), absolute pressure
P = Pa + p gh
= 1.01 x 105 Pa
+ 1.03 x 103kg m‘3 x 10 m 8'2 x 1000 m
= 104.01 x 105 Pa
z 104 atm
(b) Gauge pressure is P —Pa= p gh = P g
Pg = 1.03 x 103 kgm‘3x 10 ms2 x 1000 m
= 103 x 105 Pa
z 103 atIn
(C) The pressure outside the submarine is
P = Pa + p gh and the pressure inside it is Pa.
Hence, the net pressure acting on the
window is gauge pressure, P g = pgh. Since
the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the
force acting on it is
F=PgA= 103x 105Pa>< 0.04m2=4.12>< 105N
4

10.2.4 Hydraulic Machines

Let us now consider what happens when we
change the pressure on a ﬂuid contained in a
vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a
piston and three vertical tubes at different
points [Fig. 10.6 (a)]. The pressure in the
horizontal cylinder is indicated by the height of
liquid column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily
the same in all. If we push the piston, the ﬂuid level

rises in all the tubes, again reaching the same level
in each one of them.

 

Fig 1 0.6 (a) Whenever external pressure is applied
on any part of a ﬂuid in a vessel, it is
equally transmitted in all directions.

This indicates that when the pressure on the
cylinder was increased, it was distributed
uniformly throughout. We can say whenever
external pressure is applied on any part of a
ﬂuid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted
undiminished and equally in all directions.
This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it
has many applications in daily life.

A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift
and hydraulic brakes, are based on the Pascal’s
law. In these devices, ﬂuids are used for
transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as
shown in Fig. 10.6 (b), two pistons are separated
by the space ﬁlled with a liquid. A piston of small
cross-section A1 is used to exert a force F1 directly

F
on the liquid. The pressure P = All is
transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger
cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2,
which results in an upward force of P X A2.

Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a
large force (large weight of, say a car, or a truck,

Archemedes' Principle

Fluid appears to provide partial support to the objects placed in it. When a body is wholly or partially
immersed in a ﬂuid at rest. the ﬂuid exerts pressure on the surface of the body in contact with the
ﬂuid. The pressure is greater on lower surfaces of the body than on the upper surfaces as pressure in
a ﬂuid increases with depth. The resultant of all the forces is an upward force called buoyant force.
Suppose that a cylindrical body is immersed in the ﬂuid. The upward force on the bottom of the body
is more than the downward force on its top. The ﬂuid exerts a resultant upward force or buoyant force
on the body equal to (P2— P1] x A (Fig. 10.3]. We have seen in equation 10.4 that [PZ—P1]A = pghA. Now.
hA ls the volume of the solid and phA is the weight of an equivaliant volume of the ﬂuid. (PQ—P1)A = mg.
Thus. the upward force exerted is equal to the weight of the displaced ﬂuid.

The result holds true irrespective of the shape of the object and here cylindrical object is considered
only for convenience. This is Archimedes' principle. For totally immersed objects the volume of the
ﬂuid displaced by the object is equal to its own volume. If the density of the immersed object is more
than that of the ﬂuid, the object will sink as the weight of the body is more than the upward thrust. If
the density of the object is less than that of the ﬂuid. it ﬂoats in the ﬂuid partially submerged. To
calculate the volume submerged, suppose the total volume of the object is VS and a part Vp of it is
submerged in the ﬂuid. Then. the upward force which is the weight of the displaced ﬂuid is ngp,
which must equal the weight of the body: p 9gVS = plngor ps/pl = Vp/Vs The apparent weight of the
ﬂoating body is zero.

This principle can be summarised as: ‘the loss of weight of a body submerged (partially or fully) in
a ﬂuid is equal to the weight of the ﬂuid displaced‘.

 

2019-20