Dual Nature of Radiation
and Mo’r’rer

polarity is reversed, the electrons are
repelled and only the most energetic
electrons are able to reach the collector A.
The photocurrent is found to decrease
rapidly until it drops to zero at a certain
sharply deﬁned, critical value of the negative
potential V}, on the plate A. For a particular
frequency of incident radiation, the
minimum negative (retarding) potential V0
given to the plate A for which the
photocurrent stops or becomes zero is
called the cut-01f or stopping potential.

Photocurrent—>

       

Stopping potential

The interpretation of the observation in \4
terms of photoelectrons is straightforward. _‘/o 0
All the photoelectrons emitted from the ‘— Retarding p°tenﬁal comet,“ Plate —’
metal do not have the same energy. p0tenua1
photoelectric current is zero when the FIGURE 11.3 Variation of photocurrent with
stopping potential is sufﬁcient to repel even collector plate potential for different

the most energetic photoelectrons, with the imensny Of meidem radiation"

maximum kinetic energy (Kmax), so that

Kmax=eVo (11.1)

We can now repeat this experiment with incident radiation of the same
frequency but of higher intensity I2 and I3 (13 > I2 > 11). We note that the
saturation currents are now found to be at higher values. This shows
that more electrons are being emitted per second, proportional to the
intensity of incident radiation. But the stopping potential remains the
same as that for the incident radiation of intensity 11, as shown graphically
in Fig. 1 1.3. Thus, for a given frequency of the incident radiation, the
stopping potential is independent of its intensity. In other words, the
maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons depends on the light source
and the emitter plate material, but is independent of intensity of incident
radiation.

1 1 .4.3 Effect of frequency of incident radiation on stopping
potential

We now study the relation between the T
frequency v of the incident radiation and the
stopping potential V0. We suitably adjust the
same intensity of light radiation at various
frequencies and study the variation of
photocurrent with collector plate potential. The
resulting variation is shown in Fig. 1 1.4. We
obtain different values of stopping potential but
the same value of the saturation current for
incident radiation of different frequencies. The
energy of the emitted electrons depends on the
frequency of the incident radiations. The
stopping potential is more negative for higher
frequencies of incident radiation. Note from 391

      
 

Photoelectric
current

Saturation current

 

‘\63 ‘Voz -Vm 0 Collector plate potential —>
<— Retarding potential

FIGURE 11.4 Variation of photoelectric current
with collector plate potential for different
frequencies of incident radiation.

2019-20