Nuclei

The composition of isotopes of an element can now be readily
explained. The nuclei of isotopes of a given element contain the same
number of protons, but differ from each other in their number of neutrons.
Deuterium, 2H, which is an isotope of hydrogen, contains one proton
and one neutron. Its other isotope tritium, 3H , contains one proton and
two neutrons. The element gold has 32 isotopes, ranging from A = 1 73 to
A = 204. We have already mentioned that chemical properties of elements
depend on their electronic structure. As the atoms of isotopes have
identical electronic structure they have identical chemical behaviour and
are placed in the same location in the periodic table.

All nuclides with same mass number A are called isobars. For
example, the nuclides f’H and 3He are isobars. Nuclides with same
neutron number N but different atomic number Z, for example 1;? Hg
and 1397 Au, are called isotones.

13.3 SIZE OF THE NUCLEUS

As we have seen in Chapter 12, Rutherford was the pioneer who
postulated and established the existence of the atomic nucleus. At
Rutherford’s suggestion, Geiger and Marsden performed their classic
experiment: on the scattering of a-particles from thin gold foils. Their
experiments revealed that the distance of closest approach to a gold
nucleus of an a-particle of kinetic energy 5.5 MeV is about 4.0 X 10‘14 m.
The scattering of a-particle by the gold sheet could be understood by
Rutherford by assuming that the coulomb repulsive force was solely
responsible for scattering. Since the positive charge is confined to the
nucleus, the actual size of the nucleus has to be less than 4.0 X 10—14m.

If we use a—particles of higher energies than 5.5 MeV, the distance of
closest approach to the gold nucleus will be smaller and at some point
the scattering will begin to be affected by the short range nuclear forces,
and differ from Rutherford’s calculations. Rutherford’s calculations are
based on pure coulomb repulsion between the positive charges of the a-
particle and the gold nucleus. From the distance at which deviations set
in, nuclear sizes can be inferred.

By performing scattering experiments in which fast electrons, instead
of OL-particles, are projectiles that bombard targets made up of various
elements, the sizes of nuclei of various elements have been accurately
measured.

It has been found that a nucleus of mass number A has a radius

R =R0A1/3 (13.5)
where R0 = 1.2 X 10‘15m (=1.2 fm; 1 frn = 10—15m). This means the volume
of the nucleus, which is proportional to R3 is proportional to A. Thus the
density of nucleus is a constant, independent of A, for all nuclei. Different
nuclei are like a drop of liquid of constant density. The density of nuclear
matter is approximately 2.3 X 1017 kg m‘3. This density is very large
compared to ordinary matter, say water, which is 103 kg m‘3. This is
understandable, as we have already seen that most of the atom is empty.
Ordinary matter consisting of atoms has a large amount of empty space.

2019-20

441