Electromagnetic
Induction

(iii) Induction furnace: Induction furnace can be used to produce high

temperatures and can be utilised to prepare alloys, by melting the
constituent metals. A high frequency alternating current is passed
through a coil which surrounds the metals to be melted. The eddy
currents generated in the metals produce high temperatures sufficient
to melt it.

(iv) Electric power meters: The shiny metal disc in the electric power meter

(analogue type) rotates due to the eddy currents. Electric currents
are induced in the disc by magnetic ﬁelds produced by sinusoidally
varying currents in a coil.

You can observe the rotating shiny disc in the power meter of your

house.
ELECTROMAGNETIC DAMPING

Take two hollow thin cylindrical pipes of equal internal diameters made of aluminium and
PVC, respectively. Fix them vertically with clamps on retort stands. Take a small cylinderical
magnet having diameter slightly smaller than the inner diameter of the pipes and drop it
through each pipe in such a way that the magnet does not touch the sides of the pipes
during its fall. You will observe that the magnet dropped through the PVC pipe takes the
same time to come out of the pipe as it would take when dropped through the same height
without the pipe. Note the time it takes to come out of the pipe in each case. You will see that
the magnet takes much longer time in the case of aluminium pipe. Why is it so? It is due to
the eddy currents that are generated in the aluminium pipe which oppose the change in
magnetic ﬂux, i.e., the motion of the magnet. The retarding force due to the eddy currents
inhibits the motion of the magnet. Such phenomena are referred to as electromagnetic damping.
Note that eddy currents are not generated in PVC pipe as its material is an insulator whereas

aluminium is a conductor.

6.9 INDUCTANCE

An electric current can be induced in a coil by ﬂux change produced by
another coil in its vicinity or ﬂux change produced by the same coil. These
two situations are described separately in the next two sub-sections.
However, in both the cases, the ﬂux through a coil is proportional to the
current. That is, (DB 0c 1.

Further, if the geometry of the coil does not vary with time then,

dqu 0: d1

dt dt
For a closely wound coil of N turns, the same magnetic ﬂux is linked
with all the turns. When the ﬂux (PB through the coil changes, each turn

contributes to the induced emf. Therefore, a term called ﬂux linkage is
used which is equal to N¢>B for a closely wound coil and in such a case

NCDBoc I

The constant of proportionality, in this relation, is called inductance.
We shall see that inductance depends only on the geometry of the coil

 

2019-20

219