252

PHYSICS

 

Example 1 0. 1 The two thigh bones
(femurs). each of cross-sectional arealO cm2

support the upper part ofa human body of
mass 40 kg. Estimate the average pressure
sustained by the femurs.

 

Answer Total cross-sectional area of the
femurs is A = 2 x 10 em2 = 20 x 10'4 m2. The
force acting on them is F = 40 kg wt = 400 N
(taking 9 = 10 m S'2). This force is acting
vertically down and hence, normally on the
femurs. Thus, the average pressure is

Pau=%=2><105Nm_2 4

10.2. 1 Pascal's Law

The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that
the pressure in a ﬂuid at rest is the same at all
points if they are at the same height. This fact
may be demonstrated in a simple way.

 

Fig. 10.2 Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC—DEF is an
element of the interior of a ﬂuid at rest.
This element is in the form of a right—
angled prism The element is small so that
the effect of gravity can be ignored, but it
has been enlarged for the sake of clarity.

Fig. 10.2 shows an element in the interior of
a ﬂuid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the
form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this
prismatic element is very small so that every
part of it can be considered at the same depth
from the liquid surface and therefore, the effect
of the gravity is the same at all these points.
But for clarity we have enlarged this element.
The forces on this element are those exerted by
the rest of the ﬂuid and they must be normal to
the surfaces of the element as discussed above.
Thus, the ﬂuid exerts pressures Pa, Pb and PC on

2019-20

this element of area corresponding to the normal
forces Fa, Fb and Fe as shown in Fig. 10.2 on the
faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Ab
and AC respectively. Then
Fb sine = F0, Fb cosB = Fa (by equilibrium)
Ab sine = AC, Ab cost) = A3 (by geometry)
Thus,

F b _ F c _ Fa .
Ab AC Aa ’

Hence, pressure exerted is same in all
directions in a ﬂuid at rest. It again reminds us
that like other types of stress, pressure is not a
vector quantity. No direction can be assigned
to it. The force against any area within (or
bounding) a ﬂuid at rest and under pressure is
normal to the area, regardless of the orientation
of the area.

Now consider a ﬂuid element in the form of a
horizontal bar of uniform cross-section. The bar
is in equilibrium. The horizontal forces exerted
at its two ends must be balanced or the
pressure at the two ends should be equal. This
proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the
pressure is same at all points in a horizontal
plane. Suppose the pressure were not equal in
different parts of the ﬂuid, then there would be
a ﬂow as the ﬂuid will have some net force
acting on it. Hence in the absence of ﬂow the
pressure in the ﬂuid must be same everywhere
in a horizontal plane.

 

Pb = Pa = Pa (10.4)

10.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth

Consider a ﬂuid at rest in a container. In
Fig. 10.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.
The pressures at points 1 and 2 are P1 and P2
respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of
ﬂuid having area of base A and height h. As the
ﬂuid is at rest the resultant horizontal forces
should be zero and the resultant vertical forces
should balance the weight of the element. The
forces acting in the vertical direction are due to
the ﬂuid pressure at the top (PIA) acting
downward, at the bottom (P2A) acting upward.
If mg is weight of the ﬂuid in the cylinder we
have

(P2—P1) A = mg (10.5)

Now, if p is the mass density of the ﬂuid, we
have the mass of ﬂuid to be m = pV= phA so
that

P2 —P1= pgh (10.6)