198

PHYSICS

recorded in the spring balance is zero since the
spring is not stretched at all. If the object were
a human being, he or she will not feel his weight
since there is no upward force on him. Thus,
when an object is in free fall, it is weightless and
this phenomenon is usually called the
phenomenon of weightlessness.

In a satellite around the earth, every part
and parcel of the satellite has an acceleration
towards the centre of the earth which is exactly

the value of earth’s acceleration due to gravity
at that position. Thus in the satellite everything
inside it is in a state of free fall. This is just as if
we were falling towards the earth from a height.
Thus, in a manned satellite, people inside
experience no gravity. Gravity for us defines the
vertical direction and thus for them there are no
horizontal or vertical directions, all directions are
the same. Pictures of astronauts ﬂoating in a
satellite show this fact.

SUMMARY

1. Newton’s law of universal gravitation states that the gravitational force of attraction
between any two particles of masses m1 and m2 separated by a distance rhas the magnitude

mlm2

2
T

F=G

 

where G is the universal gravitational constant, which has the value 6.672 ><1(T11 N m2 kg.

2. If we have to find the resultant gravitational force acting on the particle In due to a
number of masses M1, M2, ....Mnetc. we use the principle of superposition. Let F1, F2, ....Fn
be the individual forces due to M1, M2, ....Mn_ each given by the law of gravitation. From
the principle of superposition each force acts independently and uninﬂuenced by the
other bodies. The resultant force FR is then found by vector addition

n
FR=F1+F2+ ...... +Fn=ZFi
i=1

where the symbol ‘2' stands for summation.

3. Kepler’s laws of planetary motion state that

(a) All planets move in elliptical orbits with the Sun at one of the focal points

(b) The radius vector drawn from the Sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal
time intervals. This follows from the fact that the force of gravitation on the planet is
central and hence angular momentum is conserved.

(c) The square of the orbital period of a planet is proportional to the cube of the semi—
major axis of the elliptical orbit of the planet

The period T and radius R of the circular orbit of a planet about the Sun are related

by

 

T2 = 4“2 R3
GMS

where MS is the mass of the Sun. Most planets have nearly circular orbits about the
Sun. For elliptical orbits, the above equation is valid if R is replaced by the semi—major

axis, (L
4. The acceleration due to gravity.

[a] at a height h above the earth's surface

 

 

GM
900 = —E2
(RE + h)
GME 2h
R; 1 _ E for h<< RE
g(h) = g(0)(1 — E] where g(0) = GIVE
RE RE
2019-20