10.

11.

 

This is because electron scattering senses the charge distribution of
the nucleus, whereas alpha and similar particles sense the nuclear
matter.

After Einstein showed the equivalence of mass and energy, E = m2,
we cannot any longer speak of separate laws of conservation of mass
and conservation of energy, but we have to speak of a unified law of
conservation of mass and energy. The most convincing evidence that
this principle operates in nature comes from nuclear physics. It is
central to our understanding of nuclear energy and harnessing it as a
source of power. Using the principle, Q of a nuclear process [decay or
reaction) can be expressed also in terms of initial and final masses.

The nature of the binding energy (per nucleon) curve shows that
exothermic nuclear reactions are possible, when two light nuclei fuse
or when a heavy nucleus undergoes ﬁssion into nuclei with intermediate
mass.

For fusion, the light nuclei must have sufficient initial energy to
overcome the coulomb potential barrier. That is why fusion requires
very high temperatures.

Although the binding energy (per nucleon) curve is smooth and slowly
varying. it shows peaks at nuclides like 4He, 160 etc. This is considered
as evidence of atom—like shell structure in nuclei.

Electrons and positron are a particle—antiparticle pair. They are
identical in mass; their charges are equal in magnitude and opposite.
[It is found that when an electron and a positron come together, they
annihilate each other giving energy in the form of gamma—ray photons.)

In é’—decay [electron emission), the particle emitted along with electron
is anti—neutrino (17). On the other hand, the particle emitted in [3”—
decay [positron emission) is neutrino (v). Neutrino and anti—neutrino
are a particle-antiparticle pair. There are anti particles associated
with every particle. What should be antiproton which is the anti
particle of the proton?

A free neutron is unstable [n —> p + e‘ + 17). But a similar free proton
decay is not possible. since a proton is (slightly) lighter than a neutron.

Gamma emission usually follows alpha or beta emission. A nucleus
in an excited (higher) state goes to a lower state by emitting a gamma
photon. A nucleus may be left in an excited state after alpha or beta
emission. Successive emission of gamma rays from the same nucleus
[as in case of “M, Fig. 13.4) is a clear proof that nuclei also have
discrete energy levels as do the atoms.

Radioactivity is an indication of the instability of nuclei. Stability
requires the ratio of neutron to proton to be around 1:1 for light
nuclei. This ratio increases to about 3:2 for heavy nuclei. [More
neutrons are required to overcome the effect of repulsion among the
protons.) Nuclei which are away from the stability ratio, i.e., nuclei
which have an excess of neutrons or protons are unstable. In fact.
only about 10% of knon isotopes [of all elements), are stable. Others
have been either artificially produced in the laboratory by bombarding
a, p, d, n or other particles on targets of stable nuclear species or
identified in astronomical observations of matter in the universe.

2019-20

Nuclei

461