FIGURE 1.30 Gaussian surface for a
uniformly charged infinite plane sheet.

38

 

i Physics

2

 

Flux through the Gaussian surface

ﬂux through the curved cylindrical part of the surface

= EX 2an

The surface includes charge equal to A l. Gauss’s law then gives
E X 2an = 21/80

A
_ 2n80r

 

i.e., E

Vectorially, E at any point is given by

A -

E = n
2ns0r (1'32)

 

where 13 is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passing
through the point. E is directed outward if A is positive and inward if 2. is
negative.

Note that when we write a vector A as a scalar multiplied by a unit
vector, i.e., as A = A i , the scalar A is an algebraic number. It can be
negative or positive. The direction of A will be the same as that of the unit
vector {1 if A > O and opposite to i if A < 0. When we want to restrict to
non-negative values, we use the symbol |A| and call it the modulus of A.
Thus, A| 2 O .

Also note that though only the charge enclosed by the surface (Al)
was included above, the electric field E is due to the charge on the entire
wire. Further, the assumption that the wire is infinitely long is crucial.
Without this assumption, we cannot take E to be normal to the curved
part of the cylindrical Gaussian surface. However, Eq. (1.32) is
approximately true for electric ﬁeld around the central portions of a long
wire, where the end effects may be ignored.

 

1. 15.2 Field due to a uniformly charged inﬁnite plane sheet

Let a be the uniform surface charge density of an infinite plane sheet
(Fig. 1.30). We take the x—axis normal to the given plane. By symmetry,
the electric field will not depend on y and z coordinates and its direction
at every point must be parallel to the x—direction.
Surface We can take the Gaussian surface to be a
charge densitya rectangular parallelepiped of cross-sectional area
A, as shown. (A cylindrical surface will also do.) As
seen from the figure, only the two faces 1 and 2 will
contribute to the ﬂux; electric field lines are parallel
to the other faces and they, therefore, do not
contribute to the total ﬂux.
The unit vector normal to surface 1 is in —x
direction while the unit vector normal to surface 2

 

is in the +x direction. Therefore, ﬂux E.AS through
both the surfaces are equal and add up. Therefore
the net ﬂux through the Gaussian surface is 2 EA.
The charge enclosed by the closed surface is 6A.
Therefore by Gauss’s law,

2019-20