374

PHYSICS

 

in general) and elastic properties (Young’s
modulus for linear media / shear modulus, bulk
modulus) of the medium. The medium
determines the speed; Eq. (15.12) then relates
wavelength to frequency for the given speed. Of
course, as remarked earlier, the medium can
support both transverse and longitudinal waves,
which will have different speeds in the same
medium. Later in this chapter, we shall obtain
specific expressions for the speed of mechanical
waves in some media.

15.4.1 Speed of a Transverse Wave on
Stretched String

The speed of a mechanical wave is determined
by the restoring force setup in the medium when
it is disturbed and the inertial properties (mass
density) of the medium. The speed is expected to
be directly related to the former and inversely to
the latter. For waves on a string, the restoring
force is provided by the tension Tin the string.
The inertial property will in this case be linear
mass density p, which is mass m of the string
divided by its length L. Using Newton’s Laws of
Motion, an exact formula for the wave speed on
a string can be derived, but this derivation is
outside the scope of this book. We shall,
therefore, use dimensional analysis. We already
know that dimensional analysis alone can never
yield the exact formula. The overall
dimensionless constant is always left
undetermined by dimensional analysis.

The dimension of ,u is [ML—1] and that of T is
like force, namely [MLT2]. We need to combine
these dimensions to get the dimension of speed
v [L’ILI]. Simple inspection shows that the
quantity T/u has the relevant dimension

[MLT—Z]
[MEI]

Thus if T and u are assumed to be the only
relevant physical quantities,

=[L2T-2]

v =C E (15.13)

y
where C is the undetermined constant of
dimensional analysis. In the exact formula, it
turms out, C=l. The speed of transverse waves
on a stretched string is given by

v = 3 (15.14)

)1

Note the important point that the speed v
depends only on the properties of the medium T
and ,u (T is a property of the stretched string
arising due to an external force). It does not
depend on wavelength or frequency of the wave
itself. In higher studies, you will come across
waves whose speed is not independent of
frequency of the wave. Of the two parameters 2L
and v the source of disturbance determines the
frequency of the wave generated. Given the

Propagation of a pulse on a rope
You can easily see the motion of a pulse on a rope. You can also see
its reﬂection from a rigid boundary and measure its velocity of travel.
You will need a rope of diameter 1 to 3 cm, two hooks and some
weights. You can perform this experiment in your classroom or
laboratory.

Take a long rope or thick string of diameter 1 to 3 cm. and tie it to
hooks on opposite walls in a hall or laboratory. Let one end pass on
a hook and hang some weight [about 1 to 5 kg) to it. The walls may
be about 3 to 5 m apart.

Take a stick or a rod and strike the rope hard at a point near one
end. This creates a pulse on the rope which now travels on it. You
can see it reaching the end and reﬂecting back from it. You can
check the phase relation between the incident pulse and reﬂected
pulse. You can easily watch two or three reﬂections before the pulse
dies out. You can take a stopwatch and find the time for the pulse
to travel the distance between the walls. and thus measure its

velocity. Compare it with that obtained from Eq. [15.14].

This is also what happens with a thin metallic string of a musical instrument. The major difference is
that the velocity on a string is fairly high because of low mass per unit length. as compared to that on a
thick rope. The low velocity on a rope allows us to watch the motion and make measurements beautifully.

 

2019-20