l Physics

 

T.
5
L.
C
'3
C
CL
h
72
_o
3%
ea)»
v2
8£
:5:
01';
gs).
.ﬁa
$59
ea
“a"?
>
9;
ED-
Lu;
00
3';
E4:
«5.9
:3;
~82
gs
nil
£3

 

<— Electron diffusion

Electron drift —>

14.5 p-n JUNCTION

A p-n junction is the basic building block of many semiconductor devices
like diodes, transistor, etc. A clear understanding of the junction behaviour
is important to analyse the working of other semiconductor devices.
We will now try to understand how a junction is formed and how the

junction behaves under the inﬂuence of external applied voltage (also
called bias).

14.5.1 p-n junction formation

Consider a thin p-type silicon (p-Si) semiconductor wafer. By adding
precisely a small quantity of pentavelent impurity, part of the p-Si wafer
can be converted into n-Si. There are several processes by which a
semiconductor can be formed. The wafer now contains p-region and
n-region and a metallurgical junction between p-, and n- region.

Two important processes occur during the formation of a p-n junction:
diffusion and drift. We know that in an n-type semiconductor, the
concentration of electrons (number of electrons per unit volume) is more
compared to the concentration of holes. Similarly, in a p-type
semiconductor, the concentration of holes is more than the concentration
of electrons. During the formation of p-n junction, and due to the
concentration gradient across p-, and n- sides, holes diffuse from p-side
to n-side (p —> n) and electrons diffuse from n-side to p-side (n —> p). This
motion of charge carries gives rise to diffusion current across the junction.

When an electron diffuses from n —> p, it leaves behind an ionised
donor on n-side. This ionised donor (positive charge) is immobile as it is
bonded to the surrounding atoms. As the electrons continue to diffuse
from n —> p, a layer of positive charge (or positive space-charge region) on
n-side of the junction is developed.

Similarly, when a hole diffuses from p —> 11 due to the concentration
gradient, it leaves behind an ionised acceptor (negative charge) which is
immobile. As the holes continue to diffuse, a layer of negative charge (or
negative space-charge region) on the p-side of the junction is developed.
This space-charge region on either side of the junction together is known
as depletion region as the electrons and holes taking part in the initial
movement across the junction depleted the region of its
free charges (Fig. 14.10). The thickness of depletion region
is of the order of one-tenth of a micrometre. Due to the

999939 positive space-charge region on n-side of the junction and

p 33$: n negative space charge region on p-side of the junction,
966969 an electric field directed from positive charge towards

:eeee: negative charge develops. Due to this field, an electron on

Hole diffusioh _> 5(— Depletion region p-side of the junction moves to n-side and a hole on n-
<— H016 drift side of the junction moves to p-side. The motion of charge

FIGURE 14.10 [HI junction carriers due to the electric field is called drift. Thus a
fonnation procesg drift current, which is opposite in direction to the diffusion

478

current (Fig. 1 4. 1 0) starts.

2019-20