164

PHYSICS

with angular velocity (0. Each mass element
of the ring is at a distance R from the axis,
and moves with a speed Ra). The kinetic
energy is therefore,

K=lM122=l R2002
2 2
Comparing with Eq. (7.35) we get I = MR2

for the ring.
A
I
I
I
I

9’

M2 M/2

 

C
<—U2—><—l/2—>

Fig. 7.28 A light rod of length l with a pair of masses
rotating about an axis through the centre of
mass of the system and perpendicular to
the rod. The total mass of the system is M.

(b) Next, take a rigid rod of negligible mass of

length of length lwith a pair of small masses,

rotating about an axis through the centre of

mass perpendicular to the rod (Fig. 7 .28).

Each mass M / 2 is at a distance 1/2 from the

axis. The moment of inertia of the masses is

therefore given by
(M/2) (1/2)2 + (M/2)(l/2)2

Thus, for the pair of masses, rotating about
the axis through the centre of mass
perpendicular to the rod

I = Ml2 / 4
Table 7 . 1 simply gives the moment of inertia of
various familiar regular shaped bodies about
specific axes. (The derivations of these
expressions are beyond the scope of this textbook
and you will study them in higher classes.)

As the mass of a body resists a change in its
state of linear motion, it is a measure of its inertia
in linear motion. Similarly, as the moment of
inertia about a given axis of rotation resists a
change in its rotational motion, it can be
regarded as a measure of rotational inertia of
the body; it is a measure of the way in which
different parts of the body are distributed at
different distances from the axis. Unlike the
mass of a body, the moment of inertia is not a
fixed quantity but depends on distribution of
mass about the axis of rotation, and the
orientation and position of the axis of rotation

2019-20

with respect to the body as a whole. As a
measure of the way in which the mass of a
rotating rigid body is distributed with respect to
the axis of rotation, we can define a new
parameter, the radius of gyration. It is related
to the moment of inertia and the total mass of
the body.

Notice from the Table 7.1 that in all
cases, we can write I = Mk2, where k has
the dimension of length. For a rod, about
the perpendicular axis at its midpoint,

k2 = L2/12, i.e. k = L/JE. Similarly, k = R/2
for the circular disc about its diameter. The
length k is a geometric property of the body and
axis of rotation. It is called the radius of
gyration. The radius of gyration of a body
about an axis may be defined as the distance
from the axis of a mass point whose mass is
equal to the mass of the whole body and whose
moment of inertia is equal to the moment of
inertia of the body about the axis.

Thus, the moment of inertia of a rigid body
depends on the mass of the body, its shape and
size; distribution of mass about the axis of
rotation, and the position and orientation of the
axis of rotation.

From the definition, Eq. (7 .34), we can infer
that the dimensions of moments of inertia are
ML2 and its SI units are kg m2.

The property of this extremely important
quantity I, as a measure of rotational inertia of
the body, has been put to a great practical use.
The machines, such as steam engine and the
automobile engine, etc., that produce rotational
motion have a disc with a large moment of
inertia, called a ﬂywheel. Because of its large
moment of inertia, the ﬂywheel resists the
sudden increase or decrease of the speed of the
vehicle. It allows a gradual change in the speed
and prevents jerky motions, thereby ensuring
a smooth ride for the passengers on the vehicle.

7.10 THEOREMS OF PERPENDICULAR AND
PARALLEL AXES

These are two useful theorems relating to
moment of inertia. We shall first discuss the
theorem of perpendicular axes and its simple
yet instructive application in working out the
moments of inertia of some regular-shaped
bodies.