i Physics

(ii) is subject to torque like a magnetic needle. This led Ampere to suggest
that all magnetism is due to circulating currents. This seems to be partly
true and no magnetic monopoles have been seen so far. However,
elementary particles such as an electron or a proton also carry an intrinsic
magnetic moment, not accounted by circulating currents.

4. 10.3 The magnetic dipole moment of a revolving electron

In Chapter 12 we shall read about the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom.
You may perhaps have heard of this model which was proposed by the
Danish physicist Niels Bohr in l 9 1 l and was a stepping stone

to a new kind of mechanics, namely, quantum mechanics.

In the Bohr model, the electron (a negatively charged particle)

revolves around a positively charged nucleus much as a

planet revolves around the sun. The force in the former case

is electrostatic (Coulomb force) while it is gravitational for

® the planet-Sun case. We show this Bohr picture of the electron

m in Fig. 4.23.

+26 The electron of charge (—e) (e = + 1.6 x 10‘19 C) performs
uniform circular motion around a stationary heavy nucleus
of charge +Ze. This constitutes a current I, where,
1 _ 3
FIGURE 4.23 In the Bohr model ‘ T (432)

of hydrogen—like atoms. the
negatively charged electron is
revolving with uniform speed

and T is the time period of revolution. Let r be the orbital
radius of the electron, and v the orbital speed. Then,

around a centrally placed T _ 2nr
positively charged (+Z e) _ v (4'33)
nucleus. The uniform circular

motion of the electron
constitutes a current. The

Substituting in Eq. (4.32), we have I = ev/2atr.
There will be a magnetic moment, usually denoted by [.11.

direction of the magnetic associated with this circulating current. From Eq. (4.28) its
moment is into the plane of the magnitude is, #1 = 17112 = evr/ 2.

paper and is indicated

162

The direction of this magnetic moment is into the plane

separately by ®. of the paper in Fig. 4.23. [This follows from the right-hand

rule discussed earlier and the fact that the negatively charged
electron is moving anticlockwise, leading to a clockwise current.]
Multiplying and dividing the right-hand side of the above expression by
the electron mass me, we have,

— i(m Dr)
#1 2m 2

6

—el

— 2me [4.34(a)]

Here, lis the magnitude of the angular momentum of the electron
about the central nucleus (“orbital” angular momentum). Vectorially,

 

"z=— e l [4.34(bll

2me

The negative sign indicates that the angular momentum of the electron
is opposite in direction to the magnetic moment. Instead of electron with

2019-20