MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 277
—

maximum as the blood is pumped by the heart (systolic pressure) and a minimum as the heart relaxes
(diastolic pressure). The sphygmomanometer is a device, which measures these extreme pressures. It
works on the principle that blood ﬂow in the brachial (upper arm) artery can be made to go from
laminar to turbulent by suitable compression. Turbulent ﬂow is dissipative, and its sound can be
picked up on the stethoscope.

The gauge pressure in an air sack wrapped around the upper arm is measured using a manometer or a
dial pressure gauge (Fig. 10.27). The pressure in the sack is first increased till the brachial artery is closed.
The pressure in the sack is then slowly reduced while a stethoscope placed just below the sack is used to
listen to noises arising in the brachial artery. When
the pressure is just below the systolic (peak)
pressure, the artery opens brieﬂy. During this brief Air sack
period, the blood velocity in the highly constricted

Stethoscope\

    

artery is high and turbulent and hence noisy. The
resulting noise is heard as a tapping sound on the
stethoscope. When the pressure in the sack is
lowered further, the artery remains open for a longer
portion of the heart cycle. Nevertheless, it remains
closed during the diastolic (minimum pressure)
phase of the heartbeat. Thus the duration of the
tapping sound is longer. When the pressure in the
sack reaches the diastolic pressure the artery is
open during the entire heart cycle. The ﬂow is
however, still turbulent and noisy. But instead of a
tapping sound we hear a steady, continuous roar
on the stethoscope.

Fig. 1 0.27 Blood pressure measurement using the
sphygmomanometer and stethoscope.

The blood pressure of a patient is presented as the ratio of systolic / diastolic pressures. For a resting
healthy adult it is typically 120/80 mm of Hg (120/80 torr). Pressures above 140/90 require medical
attention and advice. High blood pressures may seriously damage the heart, kidney and other organs and
must be controlled.

2019-20