Moving Chorges and
Magnetism

increases, the radius of the circular path increases. So the path is a
spiral one.

The whole assembly is evacuated to minimise collisions between the
ions and the air molecules. A high frequency alternating voltage is applied
to the dees. In the sketch shown in Fig. 4.8, positive ions or positively
charged particles (e. g., protons) are released at the centre P. They move
in a semi-circular path in one of the dees and arrive in the gap between
the dees in a time interval T/ 2; where T, the period of revolution, is given
by Eq. (4.6),

 

 

T=i22nm
VC qB
V — qB 48
or C 27tm (')

This frequency is called the cyclotron frequency for obvious reasons
and is denoted by vC.

The frequency v01 of the applied voltage is adjusted so that the polarity
of the dees is reversed in the same time that it takes the ions to complete
one half of the revolution. The requirement v01 = vc is called the resonance
condition. The phase of the supply is adjusted so that when the positive
ions arrive at the edge of D1, D2 is at a lower
potential and the ions are accelerated across the
gap. Inside the dees the particles travel in a region
free of the electric field. The increase in their

Magnetic ﬁeld out
of the paper

Deﬂection plate

 

 

kinetic energy is qV each time they cross from
one dee to another (Vrefers to the voltage across
the dees at that time). From Eq. (4.5), it is clear
that the radius of their path goes on increasing
each time their kinetic energy increases. The ions
are repeatedly accelerated across the dees until
they have the required energy to have a radius
approximately that of the dees. They are then
deﬂected by a magnetic ﬁeld and leave the system

via an exit slit. From Eq. (4.5) we have, D1
BR
v = q— (4.9)
m

 

    
 

where R is the radius of the trajectory at exit, and
equals the radius of a dee.

   

OSCILLATOR

. _ Exit Port

, ' Charged
- particle

 

Hence, the kinetic energy of the ions is,

(4.10)

The operation of the cyclotron is based on the
fact that the time for one revolution of an ion is
independent of its speed or radius of its orbit.
The cyclotron is used to bombard nuclei with
energetic particles, so accelerated by it, and study

FIGURE 4.8 A schematic sketch of the
cyclotron. There is a source of charged
particles or ions at P which move in a
circular fashion in the dees. DI and D2. on
account of a uniform perpendicular
magnetic field B. An alternating voltage
source accelerates these ions to high
speeds. The ions are eventually ‘extracted'
at the exit port.

141

2019-20