MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

 

We can rearrange the above terms to obtain

1 1
P1+(§) p012 + pgh1= P2+ (5] p022 + [)th

(10.12)
This is Bernoulli’s equation. Since 1 and 2
refer to any two locations along the pipeline,
we may write the expression in general as

E

1
P+ ( )pv2 + pgh = constant (10.13)

 

Fig. 10.9 The ﬂow of an ideal ﬂuid in a pipe of
varying cross section. The ﬂuid in a

section of length v 1At moves to the section
of length vZAt in time At.

In words, the Bernoulli’s relation may be
stated as follows: As we move along a streamline
the sum of the pressure (P), the kinetic energy

pv2

per unit volume [ 2 j and the potential energy

per unit volume (p gh) remains a constant.

Note that in applying the energy conservation
principle, there is an assumption that no energy
is lost due to friction. But in fact, when ﬂuids
ﬂow. some energy does get lost due to internal
friction. This arises due to the fact that in a
ﬂuid ﬂow, the different layers of the ﬂuid ﬂow
with different velocities. These layers exert
frictional forces on each other resulting in a loss
of energy. This property of the ﬂuid is called
viscosity and is discussed in more detail in a
later section. The lost kinetic energy of the ﬂuid
gets converted into heat energy. Thus,
Bernoulli’s equation ideally applies to ﬂuids with
zero viscosity or non-viscous ﬂuids. Another

restriction on application of Bernoulli theorem
is that the ﬂuids must be incompressible, as
the elastic energy of the ﬂuid is also not taken
into consideration. In practice, it has a large
number of useful applications and can help
explain a wide variety of phenomena for low
viscosity incompressible ﬂuids. Bernoulli’s
equation also does not hold for non-steady or
turbulent ﬂows, because in that situation
velocity and pressure are constantly ﬂuctuating
in time.

When a ﬂuid is at rest i.e., its velocity is zero
everywhere, Bernoulli’s equation becomes

P1+ pgh1= P2 + pgh.
(Pl—P2) = pg (’12—’11)
which is same as Eq. (10.6).

10.4.1 Speed of Efﬂux: Torricelli's Law

The word efﬂux means ﬂuid outﬂow. Torricelli
discovered that the speed of efﬂux from an open
tank is given by a formula identical to that of a
freely falling body. Consider a tank containing
a liquid of density p with a small hole in its side
at a height yl from the bottom (see Fig. 10.10).
The air above the liquid, whose surface is at
height y2. is at pressure P. From the equation
of continuity [Eq. (10. 10)] we have

v1A1=v2A2
A1

v 2—D

2 A2 1

 

Fig. 10.10 Torricelli’s law. The speed of efﬂux, v1,
from the side of the container is given by
the application of Bernoulli’s equation.
If the container is open at the top to the

atmosphere then v1 = ./2 g h .

2019-20