Electric Charges
and Fields

10.

 

POINTS TO PONDER

You might wonder why the protons, all carrying positive charges, are
compactly residing inside the nucleus. Why do they not ﬂy away? You
will learn that there is a third kind of a fundamental force, called the
strong force which holds them together. The range of distance where
this force is effective is, however, very small ~ 10’14 m. This is precisely
the size of the nucleus. Also the electrons are not allowed to sit on
top of the protons, i.e. inside the nucleus, due to the laws of quantum
mechanics. This gives the atoms their structure as they exist in nature.

Coulomb force and gravitational force follow the same inverse-square
law. But gravitational force has only one sign [always attractive), while
Coulomb force can be of both signs [attractive and repulsive), allowing
possibility of cancellation of electric forces. This is how gravity, despite
being a much weaker force, can be a dominating and more pervasive
force in nature.

The constant of proportionality k in Coulomb's law is a matter of
choice if the unit of charge is to be defined using Coulomb’s law. In SI
units, however, what is defined is the unit of current (A) via its magnetic
effect (Ampere's law) and the unit of charge (coulomb) is simply defined
by [IC = l A s]. In this case, the value of k is no longer arbitrary; it is
approximately 9 X 109 N m2 CH2.

The rather large value of k, i.e., the large size of the unit of charge
(1C) from the point of view of electric effects arises because [as
mentioned in point 3 already) the unit of charge is defined in terms of
magnetic forces [forces on current—carrying wires] which are generally
much weaker than the electric forces. Thus while 1 ampere is a unit
of reasonable size for magnetic effects, 1 C = 1 A s, is too big a unit for
electric effects.

The additive property of charge is not an ‘obvious’ property. It is related
to the fact that electric charge has no direction associated with it;
charge is a scalar.

Charge is not only a scalar [or invariant) under rotation; it is also
invariant for frames of reference in relative motion. This is not always
true for every scalar. For example, kinetic energy is a scalar under
rotation, but is not invariant for frames of reference in relative
motion.

Conservation of total charge of an isolated system is a property
independent of the scalar nature of charge noted in point 6.
Conservation refers to invariance in time in a given frame of reference.
A quantity may be scalar but not conserved [like kinetic energy in an
inelastic collision]. On the other hand, one can have conserved vector
quantity [e.g., angular momentum of an isolated system).

Quantisation of electric charge is a basic [unexplained] law of nature;
interestingly, there is no analogous law on quantisation of mass.

Superposition principle should not be regarded as ‘obvious’, or equated
with the law of addition of vectors. It says two things: force on one
charge due to another charge is unaffected by the presence of other
charges, and there are no additional three—body, four—body, etc., forces
which arise only when there are more than two charges.

The electric field due to a discrete charge configuration is not defined
at the locations of the discrete charges. For continuous volume charge
distribution, it is defined at any point in the distribution. For a surface
charge distribution, electric field is discontinuous across the surface.

2019-20

45