Electrostatic Potential
and Copoci’ronce

Eq. (2.54) for the case of a parallel plate capacitor, it holds good for any
type of capacitor and can, in fact, be viewed in general as a deﬁnition of
the dielectric constant of a substance.

ELECTRIC DISPLACEMENT

We have introduced the notion of dielectric constant and arrived at Eq. (2.54), without
giving the explicit relation between the induced charge density GP and the polarisation P.
We take without proof the result that

O'P = P-ﬁ

where in is a unit vector along the outward normal to the surface. Above equation is
general, true for any shape of the dielectric. For the slab in Fig. 2.23, P is along 1‘: at the
right surface and opposite to :1 at the left surface. Thus at the right surface, induced
charge density is positive and at the left surface, it is negative, as guessed already in our
qualitative discussion before. Putting the equation for electric field in vector form

A — P-ﬁ
E.n : 0-—
80

or (£0E+P)-ﬁ=cr

The quantity 80 E + P is called the electric displacement and is denoted by D. It is a
vector quantity. Thus,

D=£0E+P,D-ﬁ =6,

The significance of D is this : in vacuum, E is related to the free charge density 6.
When a dielectric medium is present, the corresponding role is taken up by D. For a
dielectric medium, it is D not E that is directly related to free charge density a, as seen in
above equation. Since P is in the same direction as E, all the three vectors P, E and D are

parallel.
The ratio of the magnitudes of D and E is

D 0'80

E 2 0' — 03,
Thus,
D=%KE
and P = D —80E = so (K—1)E
This gives for the electric susceptibility 259 defined in Eq. (2.37)
Xe =80 (K—l)

 

=%K

Example 2.8 A slab of material of dielectric constant K has the same
area as the plates of a parallel-plate capacitor but has a thickness
(3/4)d, where d is the separation of the plates. How is the capacitance
changed when the slab is inserted between the plates?

Solution Let E0 = VO/d be the electric field between the plates when
there is no dielectric and the potential difference is V0. If the dielectric
is now inserted, the electric ﬁeld in the dielectric will be E = EO/K.
The potential difference will then be

8 ’z 31mg

77

2019-20