40

PHYSICS

a rectangular coordinate system consisting of
three mutually perpenducular axes, labelled X-,
Y-, and Z- axes. The point of intersection of these
three axes is called origin (0) and serves as the
reference point. The coordinates (x, y. z) of an
object describe the position of the object with
respect to this coordinate system. To measure
time, we position a clock in this system. This
coordinate system along with a clock constitutes
a frame of reference.

If one or more coordinates of an object change
with time, we say that the object is in motion.
Otherwise, the object is said to be at rest with
respect to this frame of reference.

The choice of a set of axes in a frame of
reference depends upon the situation. For
example, for describing motion in one dimension,
we need only one axis. To describe motion in
two/ three dimensions, we need a set of two/
three axes.

Description of an event depends on the frame
of reference chosen for the description. For
example, when you say that a car is moving on
a road, you are describing the car with respect
to a frame of reference attached to you or to the
ground. But with respect to a frame of reference
attached with a person sitting in the car, the
car is at rest.

To describe motion along a straight line, we
can choose an axis, say X-axis, so that it
coincides with the path of the object. We then
measure the position of the object with reference
to a conveniently chosen origin, say O, as shown
in Fig. 3.1. Positions to the right of O are taken
as positive and to the left of O, as negative.
Following this convention, the position
coordinates of point P and Q in Fig. 3.1 are +360
m and +240 m. Similarly, the position coordinate
of point R is —120 m.

Path length

Consider the motion of a car along a straight
line. We choose the x-axis such that it coincides

R O

with the path of the car’s motion and origin of
the axis as the point from where the car started
moving, i.e. the carwas at x= O at t= 0 (Fig. 3.1).
Let P, Q and R represent the positions of the car
at different instants of time. Consider two cases
of motion. In the first case, the car moves from
O to P. Then the distance moved by the car is
OP = +360 m. This distance is called the path
length traversed by the car. In the second
case, the car moves from O to P and then moves
back from P to Q. During this course of motion,
the path length traversed is OP + PQ = + 360 m
+ (+120 m) = + 480 m. Path length is a scalar
quantity — a quantity that has a magnitude
only and no direction (see Chapter 4).

Displacement

It is useful to define another quantity
displacement as the change in position. Let
x1 and x2 be the positions of an object at time t1
and t2. Then its displacement, denoted by Ax, in
time At = (t2 - t1), is given by the difference
between the final and initial positions :

Ax = x2— x1
(We use the Greek letter delta (A) to denote a
change in a quantity.)
If x2 > x1, Ax is positive; and if x2 < x1, Ax is
negative.

Displacement has both magnitude and
direction. Such quantities are represented by
vectors. You will read about vectors in the next
chapter. Presently, we are dealing with motion
along a straight line (also called rectilinear
motion) only. In one-dimensional motion, there
are only two directions (backward and forward,
upward and downward) in which an object can
move, and these two directions can easily be
specified by + and — signs. For example,
displacement of the car in moving from O to P is :

Ax=x2—x1 = (+360 m) —Om= +360m

The displacement has a magnitude of 360 m and
is directed in the positive x direction as indicated
by the + sign. Similarly, the displacement of the
car from P to Q is 240 m— 360 m = — 120 m. The

Q P

—|—l—|—l—l—|—|—l—I—l—l—l—I—l—l—

-l60 -120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 m

‘X

+x

Fig. 3. 1 x—axis, origin and positions of a car at different times.

2019-20