PHYSICS
—

absorption, the energy in each mode being equal to 1/2 k3 T. Each translational and
rotational degree of freedom corresponds to one energy mode of absorption and has
energy 1/2 k3 T. Each vibrational frequency has two modes of energy (kinetic and potential)
with corresponding energy equal to

2 X 1/2 kBT= kBT.

Using the law of equipartition of energy, the molar specific heats of gases can be
determined and the values are in agreement with the experimental values of specific
heats of several gases. The agreement can be improved by including vibrational modes
of motion.

The mean free path lis the average distance covered by a molecule between two successive
collisions :

l
x/Enﬂ'd2

where n is the number density and d the diameter of the molecule.

1:

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Pressure of a ﬂuid is not only exerted on the wall. Pressure exists everywhere in a ﬂuid.
Any layer of gas inside the volume of a container is in equilibrium because the pressure
is the same on both sides of the layer.

We should not have an exaggerated idea of the intermolecular distance in a gas. At
ordinary pressures and temperatures, this is only 10 times or so the interatomic distance
in solids and liquids. What is different is the mean free path which in a gas is 100
times the interatomic distance and 1000 times the size of the molecule.

The law of equipartition of energy is stated thus: the energl for each degree of freedom
in thermal equilibrium is 1/2 kB T. Each quadratic term in the total energl expression of
a molecule is to be counted as a degree of freedom. Thus, each vibrational mode gives
2 (not 1) degrees of freedom (kinetic and potential energl modes), corresponding to the
energ] 2 X 1/2 kB T= kB T.

Molecules of air in a room do not all fall and settle on the ground (due to gravity)
because of their high speeds and incessant collisions. In equilibrium, there is a very
slight increase in density at lower heights (like in the atmosphere). The effect is small
since the potential energl (mgh) for ordinary heights is much less than the average
kinetic energl 1A mu2 of the molecules.

< v2 > is not always equal to ( < v >)2. The average of a squared quantity is not necessarily

the square of the average. Can you ﬁnd examples for this statement.