Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance

 

(e) We know that electric field is discontinuous across the surface
of a charged conductor. Is electric potential also discontinuous
there?

(f) What meaning would you give to the capacitance of a single
conductor?

(g) Guess a possible reason why water has a much greater
dielectric constant (= 80) than say, mica (= 6).

2.32 A cylindrical capacitor has two co-axial cylinders of length 15 cm
and radii 1.5 cm and 1.4 cm. The outer cylinder is earthed and the
inner cylinder is given a charge of 3.5 “C. Determine the capacitance
of the system and the potential of the inner cylinder. Neglect end
effects (i.e., bending of field lines at the ends).

2.33 A parallel plate capacitor is to be designed with a voltage rating
1 kV, using a material of dielectric constant 3 and dielectric strength
about 107 Vm’l. (Dielectric strength is the maximum electric field a
material can tolerate without breakdown, i.e., without starting to
conduct electricity through partial ionisation.) For safety, we should
like the field never to exceed, say 10% of the dielectric strength.
What minimum area of the plates is required to have a capacitance
of 50 pF?

2.34 Describe schematically the equipotential surfaces corresponding to
(a) a constant electric field in the z-direction,

(b) a field that uniformly increases in magnitude but remains in a
constant (say, 2) direction,

(c) a single positive charge at the origin, and

(d) a uniform grid consisting of long equally spaced parallel charged
wires in a plane.

2.35 A small sphere of radius r1 and charge q1 is enclosed by a spherical
shell of radius r2 and charge qZ. Show that if q1 is positive, charge
will necessarily ﬂow from the sphere to the shell (when the two are
connected by a wire) no matter what the charge q2 on the shell is.

2.36 Answer the following:

(a) The top of the atmosphere is at about 400 kV with respect to
the surface of the earth, corresponding to an electric field that
decreases with altitude. Near the surface of the earth, the field
is about 100 Vm’l. Why then do we not get an electric shock as
we step out of our house into the open? (Assume the house to
be a steel cage so there is no field inside!)

(b) A man fixes outside his house one evening a two metre high
insulating slab carrying on its top a large aluminium sheet of
area 1m2. Will he get an electric shock if he touches the metal
sheet next morning?

(0) The discharging current in the atmosphere due to the small
conductivity of air is known to be 1800 A on an average over

91

2019-20