274

Physics

EXAMPLE 8. 1

along the loop and of the same value.
The ﬂux (DE through this loop is

(DE = E X area of the loop

2
= mem =E=i
2 4 480

The displacement current

. d 1d _
1d 2 80% :Zd—(f: 0.5xlO 6exp(—1)

at t = 10‘3s. Now, applying Ampere-Maxwell law to the loop, we get

1 . . .
BX 27‘ X (5] = #0 (lo + lat) = #0 (0 +ld) = O.5><10‘6 poexp(—1)

or, B = 0.74 x lO‘lST

8.3 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

8.3.1 Sources of electromagnetic waves

How are electromagnetic waves produced? Neither stationary charges
nor charges in uniform motion (steady currents) can be sources of
electromagnetic waves. The former produces only electrostatic ﬁelds, while
the latter produces magnetic fields that, however, do not vary with time.
It is an important result of Maxwell’s theory that accelerated charges
radiate electromagnetic waves. The proof of this basic result is beyond
the scope of this book, but we can accept it on the basis of rough,
qualitative reasoning. Consider a charge oscillating with some frequency.
(An oscillating charge is an example of accelerating charge.) This
produces an oscillating electric ﬁeld in space, which produces an oscillating
magnetic ﬁeld, which in turn, is a source of oscillating electric field, and
so on. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields thus regenerate each
other, so to speak, as the wave propagates through the space.
The frequency of the electromagnetic wave naturally equals the
frequency of oscillation of the charge. The energy associated with the
propagating wave comes at the expense of the energy of the source — the
accelerated charge.

From the preceding discussion, it might appear easy to test the
prediction that light is an electromagnetic wave. We might think that all
we needed to do was to set up an ac circuit in which the current oscillate
at the frequency of visible light, say, yellow light. But, alas, that is not
possible. The frequency of yellow light is about 6 X 1014 Hz, while the
frequency that we get even with modern electronic circuits is hardly about
1011 Hz. This is why the experimental demonstration of electromagnetic
wave had to come in the low frequency region (the radio wave region), as
in the Hertz’s experiment (1887).

Hertz’s successful experimental test of Maxwell’s theory created a
sensation and sparked off other important works in this field. Two
important achievements in this connection deserve mention. Seven years
after Hertz, J agdish Chandra Bose, working at Calcutta (now Kolkata),

2019-20