LAWS OF MOTION

5.

10.

ll.

 

The centripetal force should not be regarded as yet another kind of force. It is
simply a name given to the force that provides inward radial acceleration to a
body in circular motion. We should always look for some material force like
tension. gravitational force. electrical force. friction. etc as the centripetal force
in any circular motion.

Static friction is a self—adjusting force up to its limit #5 N USS us N). Do not put
f5: uSN without being sure that the maximum value of static friction is coming
into play.

The familiar equation mg = R for a body on a table is true only if the body is in
equilibrium. The two forces mg and R can be different (eg. a body in an
accelerated lift). The equality of mg and R has no connection with the third
law.

The terms ‘action' and ‘reaction' in the third Law of Motion simply stand for
simultaneous mutual forces between a pair of bodies. Unlike their meaning in
ordinary language. action does not precede or cause reaction. Action and reaction
act on different bodies.

The different terms like 'friction'. 'normal reaction' ‘tension‘. ‘air resistance”.
'viscous drag'. 'thrust'. ‘buoyancy'. ‘weight'. ‘centripetal force' all stand for ‘force'
in different contexts. For clarity. every force and its equivalent terms
encountered in mechanics should be reduced to the phrase ‘force on A by B‘.
For applying the second law of motion. there is no conceptual distinction between
inanimate and animate objects. An animate object such as a human also
requires an external force to accelerate. For example, without the external
force of friction, we cannot walk on the ground.

The objective concept of force in physics should not be confused with the
subjective concept of the ‘feeling of force”. On a merry—go—around. all parts of
our body are subject to an inward force, but we have a feeling of being pushed
outward — the direction of impending motion.

 

 

5.1

5.2

5.3

EXERCISES

[For simplicity in numerical calculations, take 9 = 10 m s2)
Give the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on
(a) a drop of rain falling down with a constant speed,
(b) a cork of mass 10 g ﬂoating on water,
(c) a kite skillfully held stationary in the sky,
[(1) a car moving with a constant velocity of 30 km/ h on a rough road,
(e) a high-speed electron in space far from all material objects, and free of
electric and magnetic fields.

A pebble of mass 0.05 kg is thrown vertically upwards. Give the direction

and magnitude of the net force on the pebble,

(a) during its upward motion,

(b) during its downward motion,

(c) at the highest point where it is momentarily at rest. Do your answers
change if the pebble was thrown at an angle of 45° with the horizontal
direction?

Ignore air resistance.

Give the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on a stone of mass

0.1 kg,

(a) just after it is dropped from the window of a stationary train,

(b) just after it is dropped from the window of a train running at a constant
velocity of 36 km /h,

(c ) just after it is dropped from the window of a train accelerating with 1 m s2,

(cl) lying on the ﬂoor of a train which is accelerating with 1 m s2. the stone
being at rest relative to the train.

Neglect air resistance throughout.

2019-20

109