Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

Since D is about 25 cm, to have a magniﬁcation of six, one needs a convex
lens of focal length, f = 5 cm.

Note that m = h’/ hwhere his the size of the object and h’ the size of
the image. This is also the ratio of the angle subtended by the image
to that subtended by the object, if placed at D for comfortable Viewing.
(Note that this is not the angle actually subtended by the object at the
eye, which is h/u.) What a single-lens simple magnifier achieves is that it
allows the object to be brought closer to the eye than D.

We will now find the magnification when the image is at infinity. In
this case we will have to obtained the angular magnification. Suppose
the object has a height h. The maximum angle it can subtend, and be
clearly visible (without a lens), is when it is at the near point, i.e., a distance
D. The angle subtended is then given by

tan 60 = (E) z 9 (9.40)
D

0

We now find the angle subtended at the eye by the image when the
object is at u. From the relations

 

 

h’ v
= m = —
h u
we have the angle subtended by the image
tan 61. = h = L - B = L ze. The angle subtended by the object, when it
—v —v u —u
is at u = —f.
h
9i 2 — .41
(f) ‘9 ’

m_ a _2
— 00 _f (9.42)

This is one less than the magnification when the image is at the near
point, Eq. (9.39), but the viewing is more comfortable and the difference
in magnification is usually small. In subsequent discussions of optical
instruments (microscope and telescope) we shall assume the image to be
at inﬁnity.

A simple microscope has a limited maximum magnification (S 9) for
realistic focal lengths. For much larger magnifications, one uses two lenses,
one compounding the effect of the other. This is known as a compound
microscope. A schematic diagram of a compound microscope is shown
in Fig. 9.28. The lens nearest the object, called the objective, forms a
real, inverted, magnified image of the object. This serves as the object for
the second lens, the eyepiece, which functions essentially like a simple

2019-20

337