i Physics

F
1"
Al R
r
0

Line charge A9 = 1 Al

I P
I
R
0

Surface charge AQ = O'AS

 

Volume charge AQ = PAV

FIGURE 1.24
Definition Of linear,
surface and volume

charge densities.
In each case. the
element (Al. AS. AV)
Chosen is small on
the macroscopic
scale but contains
a very large number
of microscopic
constituents.

32

discussion, the charged comb ‘polarises’ the piece Of paper, i.e., induces
a net dipole moment in the direction of ﬁeld. Further, the electric ﬁeld
due to the comb is not uniform. In this situation, it is easily seen that the
paper should move in the direction of the comb!

1. 13 CONTINUOUS CHARGE DISTRIBUTION

We have so far dealt with charge conﬁgurations involving discrete charges
q1, q2, qn. One reason why we restricted to discrete charges is that the
mathematical treatment is simpler and does not involve calculus. For
many purposes, however, it is impractical to work in terms Of discrete
charges and we need to work with continuous charge distributions. For
example, on the surface of a charged conductor, it is impractical to specify
the charge distribution in terms Of the locations of the microscopic charged
constituents. It is more feasible to consider an area element AS (Fig. 1.24)
on the surface of the conductor (which is very small on the macroscopic
scale but big enough to include a very large number of electrons) and
specify the charge AQ on that element. We then deﬁne a surface charge
density a at the area element by

AQ

0':—
AS

We can do this at different points on the conductor and thus arrive at
a continuous function 6, called the surface charge density. The surface
charge density (7 so deﬁned ignores the quantisation of charge and the
discontinuity in charge distribution at the microscopic level*. 6 represents
macroscopic surface charge density, which in a sense, is a smoothed out
average of the microscopic charge density over an area element AS which,
as said before, is large microscopically but small macroscopically. The
units for a are C / m2.

Similar considerations apply for a line charge distribution and a volume
charge distribution. The linear charge density 1 of a wire is deﬁned by

AQ

,1 _
Al (1.24)

where Al is a small line element of wire on the macroscopic scale that,
however, includes a large number Of microscopic charged constituents,
and AQ is the charge contained in that line element. The units for A are
C / m. The volume charge density (sometimes simply called charge density)
is defined in a similar manner:

AQ

“E

where AQ is the charge included in the macroscopically small volume
element AV that includes a large number of microscopic charged
constituents. The units for p are C / m3.

The notion of continuous charge distribution is similar to that we
adopt for continuous mass distribution in mechanics. When we refer to

(1.23)

(1.25)

* At the microscopic level, charge distribution is discontinuous, because they are
discrete charges separated by intervening space where there is no charge.

2019-20