Electric Charges
and Fields

the field at any point on the spherical Gaussian surface has the
same direction as the normal to the surface there, and has the same
magnitude at all points on the surface.
The charge q enclosed by the Gaussian surface is the positive nuclear
charge and the negative charge within the sphere of radius r,

41v3
3
Substituting for the charge density p obtained earlier, we have

 

i.e.,q=Ze + p

T3

q = Ze — 28F
Gauss’s law then gives,

Ze i—L; r<R

4 1: 80 r2 R3

The electric field is directed radially outward.

(ii) r > R: In this case, the total charge enclosed by the Gaussian
spherical surface is zero since the atom is neutral. Thus, from Gauss’s
law,

E(r) X41: r2=0 or E(r)=0; r>R

At r = R, both cases give the same result: E = O.

E(r):

 

St 'I EI’IdWVXﬂ

ON SYMMETRY OPERATIONS

In Physics, we often encounter systems with various symmetries. Consideration of these
symmetries helps one arrive at results much faster than otherwise by a straightforward
calculation. Consider, for example an infinite uniform sheet of charge (surface charge
density (S) along the y-z plane. This system is unchanged if (a) translated parallel to the
y—z plane in any direction, (b) rotated about the x—axis through any angle. As the system
is unchanged under such symmetry operation, so must its properties be. In particular,
in this example, the electric ﬁeld E must be unchanged.

Translation symmetry along the y—axis shows that the electric ﬁeld must be the same
at a point (0, yl, O) as at (O, y2, 0). Similarly translational symmetry along the z—axis
shows that the electric field at two point (0, O, 21) and (O, O, Z2) must be the same. By
using rotation symmetry around the x—axis, we can conclude that E must be
perpendicular to the y—z plane, that is, it must be parallel to the x—direction.

Try to think of a symmetry now which will tell you that the magnitude of the electric
ﬁeld is a constant, independent of the x—coordinate. It thus turns out that the magnitude
of the electric ﬁeld due to a uniformly charged inﬁnite conducting sheet is the same at all
points in space. The direction, however, is opposite of each other on either side of
the sheet.

Compare this with the effort needed to arrive at this result by a direct calculation

using Coulomb’s law.

41

2019-20