9.24

9.25

9.26

Roy Optics and

Optical Instruments

 

(a) At what distance should the lens be held from the figure in
Exercise 9.29 in order to view the squares distinctly with the
maximum possible magnifying power?

(b) What is the magnification in this case?

(c) Is the magnification equal to the magnifying power in this case?
Explain.

What should be the distance between the object in Exercise 9.24
and the magnifying glass if the virtual image of each square in the
figure is to have an area of 6.25 mm2. Would you be able to see the
squares distinctly with your eyes very close to the magnifier?

[Note: Exercises 9.23 to 9.25 will help you clearly understand the
difference between magnification in absolute size and the angular
magnification (or magnifying power) of an instrument.]

Answer the following questions:

(a) The angle subtended at the eye by an object is equal to the
angle subtended at the eye by the virtual image produced by a
magnifying glass. In what sense then does a magnifying glass
provide angular magnification?

(b) In viewing through a magnifying glass, one usually positions
one’s eyes very close to the lens. Does angular magnification
change if the eye is moved back?

(0) Magnifying power of a simple microscope is inversely proportional
to the focal length of the lens. What then stops us from using a
convex lens of smaller and smaller focal length and achieving
greater and greater magnifying power?

(d) Why must both the objective and the eyepiece of a compound
microscope have short focal lengths?

(e) When viewing through a compound microscope, our eyes should
be positioned not on the eyepiece but a short distance away
from it for best viewing. Why? How much should be that short
distance between the eye and eyepiece?

9.27 An angular magnification (magnifying power) of 30X is desired using

an objective of focal length 1.25 cm and an eyepiece of focal length
5cm. How will you set up the compound microscope?

9.28 A small telescope has an objective lens of focal length 1400m and

9.29

an eyepiece of focal length 5.0 cm. What is the magnifying power of
the telescope for viewing distant objects when

(a) the telescope is in normal adjustment (i.e., when the final image
is at infinity)?

(b) the final image is formed at the least distance of distinct vision
(25 cm)?

(a) For the telescope described in Exercise 9.28 (a), what is the
separation between the objective lens and the eyepiece?

(b) If this telescope is used to view a 100 m tall tower 3 km away,
what is the height of the image of the tower formed by the objective
lens?

2019-20

347