Wave Optics

y (x,t) = asin (kx—wt) (10.32)

where a and a)(= 271v) represent the amplitude and the angular frequency
of the wave, respectively; further,

_E
It

represents the wavelength associated with the wave. We had discussed
propagation of such waves in Chapter 15 of Class XI textbook. Since the
displacement (which is along the y direction) is at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave, we have what is known as a
transverse wave. Also, since the displacement is in the y direction, it is
often referred to as a y-polarised wave. Since each point on the string
moves on a straight line, the wave is also referred to as a linearly polarised
wave. Further, the string always remains confined to the x—y plane and
therefore it is also referred to as a plane polarised wave.

In a similar manner we can consider the vibration of the string in the
x-z plane generating a z—polarised wave whose displacement will be given
by

z(x,t) = asin (kx— wt) (10.34)

It should be mentioned that the linearly polarised waves [described
by Eqs. (10.33) and (10.34)] are all transverse waves; i.e., the
displacement of each point of the string is always at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave. Finally, if the plane of vibration of
the string is changed randomly in very short intervals of time, then we
have what is known as an unpolarised wave. Thus, for an unpolarised
wave the displacement will be randomly changing with time though it
will always be perpendicular to the direction of propagation.

A (10.33)

Light waves are transverse in nature; i.e., the electric field associated
with a propagating light wave is always at right angles to the direction of
propagation of the wave. This can be easily demonstrated using a simple
polaroid. You must have seen thin plastic like sheets, which are called
polaroids. A polaroid consists of long chain molecules aligned in a
particular direction. The electric vectors (associated with the propagating
light wave) along the direction of the aligned molecules get absorbed.
Thus, if an unpolarised light wave is incident on such a polaroid then
the light wave will get linearly polarised with the electric vector oscillating
along a direction perpendicular to the aligned molecules; this direction
is known as the pass-axis of the polaroid.

Thus, if the light from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) passes
through a polaroid sheet P1, it is observed that its intensity is reduced by
half. Rotating P1 has no effect on the transmitted beam and transmitted
intensity remains constant. Now, let an identical piece of polaroid P2 be
placed before P1. As expected, the light from the lamp is reduced in
intensity on passing through P2 alone. But now rotating P1 has a dramatic
effect on the light coming from P2. In one position, the intensity transmitted

2019-20

377