282

 

i Physics

8.4.3 Infrared waves

Infrared waves are produced by hot bodies and molecules. This band
lies adjacent to the low-frequency or long-wave length end of the visible
spectrum. Infrared waves are sometimes referred to as heat waves. This
is because water molecules present in most materials readily absorb
infrared waves (many other molecules, for example, CO2, NH3, also absorb
infrared waves). After absorption, their thermal motion increases, that is,
they heat up and heat their surroundings. Infrared lamps are used in
physical therapy. Infrared radiation also plays an important role in
maintaining the earth’s warmth or average temperature through the
greenhouse effect. Incoming visible light (which passes relatively easily
through the atmosphere) is absorbed by the earth’s surface and re-
radiated as infrared (longer wavelength) radiations. This radiation is
trapped by greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapour.
Infrared detectors are used in Earth satellites, both for military purposes
and to observe growth of crops. Electronic devices (for example
semiconductor light emitting diodes) also emit infrared and are widely
used in the remote switches of household electronic systems such as TV
sets, video recorders and hi-fi systems.

8.4.4 Visible rays

It is the most familiar form of electromagnetic waves. It is the part of the
spectrum that is detected by the human eye. It runs from about
4 X 1014 Hz to about 7 X 1014 Hz or a wavelength range of about 700 —
400 nm. Visible light emitted or reﬂected from objects around us provides
us information about the world. Our eyes are sensitive to this range of
wavelengths. Different animals are sensitive to different range of
wavelengths. For example, snakes can detect infrared waves, and the
‘visible’ range of many insects extends well into the utraviolet.

8.4.5 Ultraviolet rays

It covers wavelengths ranging from about 4 X 10‘7 m (400 nm) down to
6 X 10‘10m (0.6 nm). Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is produced by special
lamps and very hot bodies. The sun is an important source of ultraviolet
light. But fortunately, most of it is absorbed in the ozone layer in the
atmosphere at an altitude of about 40 — 50 km. UV light in large quantities
has harmful effects on humans. Exposure to UV radiation induces the
production of more melanin, causing tanning of the skin. UV radiation is
absorbed by ordinary glass. Hence, one cannot get tanned or sunburn
through glass windows.

Welders wear special glass goggles or face masks with glass windows
to protect their eyes from large amount of UV produced by welding arcs.
Due to its shorter wavelengths, UV radiations can be focussed into very
narrow beams for high precision applications such as LASIK (Laser-
assisted in situ keratomileusis) eye surgery. UV lamps are used to kill
germs in water purifiers.

Ozone layer in the atmosphere plays a protective role, and hence its
depletion by chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) gas (such as freon) is a matter
of international concern.

2019-20