(a) Non-polar molecules

 

(b) Polar molecules

 

 

E t 0 In an external electric field, the

positive and negative charges of a non-

EE 6:3 polar molecule are displaced in opposite
directions. The displacement stops when

€39 the external force on the constituent

charges of the molecule is balanced by

E3 E) Q the restoring force (due to internal ﬁelds
in the molecule). The non-polar molecule

€29 thus develops an induced dipole moment.
The dielectric is said to be polarised by

the external field. We consider only the

simple situation when the induced dipole

E 7, 0 moment is in the direction of the ﬁeld and
is proportional to the ﬁeld strength.

(Substances for which this assumption
is true are called linear isotropic

@ %
Q dielectrics.) The induced dipole moments
69

g of different molecules add up giving a net
dipole moment of the dielectric in the

@ presence of the external ﬁeld.
A dielectric with polar molecules also
develops a net dipole moment in an
external field, but for a different reason.

 

FIGURE 2.22 A dielectric develops a net dipole In the absence ofany external field the

moment in an external electric field. (a) Nonrpolar
molecules. (13) Polar molecules.

72

different permanent dipoles are oriented
randomly due to thermal agitation; so
the total dipole moment is zero. When
an external field is applied, the individual dipole moments tend to align
with the field. When summed overall the molecules, there is then a net
dipole moment in the direction of the external field, i.e., the dielectric is
polarised. The extent of polarisation depends on the relative strength of
two mutually opposite factors: the dipole potential energy in the external
ﬁeld tending to align the dipoles with the ﬁeld and thermal energy tending
to disrupt the alignment. There may be, in addition, the ‘induced dipole
moment’ effect as for non-polar molecules, but generally the alignment
effect is more important for polar molecules.

Thus in either case, whether polar or non-polar, a dielectric develops
a net dipole moment in the presence of an external field. The dipole
moment per unit volume is called polarisation and is denoted by P. For
linear isotropic dielectrics,

P :16 E (2.37)

where Xe is a constant characteristic of the dielectric and is known as the
electric susceptibility of the dielectric medium.
It is possible to relate Xe to the molecular properties of the substance,

but we shall not pursue that here.

The question is: how does the polarised dielectric modify the original
external field inside it? Let us consider, for simplicity, a rectangular
dielectric slab placed in a uniform external field E0 parallel to two of its
faces. The ﬁeld causes a uniform polarisation P of the dielectric. Thus

2019-20