Duol Nature of Radiation
and Mo’r’rer

 

Every body at any temperature emits radiation of all wavelengths. It also absorbs radiation falling on it.
A body which absorbs all the radiation falling on it is called a black body. It is an ideal concept in physics, like
concepts of a point mass or uniform motion. A graph of the intensity of radiation emitted by a body versus
wavelength is called the black body spectrum No theory in those days could explain the complete black body
spectrum!

In 1900, Planck hit upon a novel idea. If we assume, he said, that radiation is emitted in packets of energy
instead of continuously as in a wave, then we can explain the black body spectrum. Planck himself regarded
these quanta, or packets, as a property of emission and absorption, rather than that of light. He derived a
formula which agreed with the entire spectrum. This was a confusing mixture of wave and particle pictures —
radiation is emitted as a particle, it travels as a wave, and is again absorbed as a particle! Moreover, this put
physicists in a dilemma. Should we again accept the particle picture of light just to explain one phenomenon?
Then what happens to the phenomena of interference and diffraction which cannot be explained by the
particle model?

But soon in 1905, Einstein explained the photoelectric effect by assuming the particle picture of light.
In 1907, Debye explained the low temperature specific heats of solids by using the particle picture for lattice
vibrations in a crystalline solid. Both these phenomena belonging to widely diverse areas of physics could be
explained only by the particle model and not by the wave model. In 1923, Compton’s x—ray scattering experiments
from atoms also went in favour of the particle picture. This increased the dilemma further.

Thus by 1923, physicists faced with the following situation. (a) There were some phenomena like rectilinear
propagation, reﬂection, refraction, which could be explained by either particle model or by wave model. (b)
There were some phenomena such as diffraction and interference which could be explained only by the wave
model but not by the particle model. (c) There were some phenomena such as black body radiation, photoelectric
effect, and Compton scattering which could be explained only by the particle model but not by the wave model.
Somebody in those days aptly remarked that light behaves as a particle on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays,
and as a wave on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and we don't talk of light on Sundays!

In 1924, de Broglie proposed his theory of wave—particle duality in which he said that not only photons
of light but also ‘particles’ of matter such as electrons and atoms possess a dual character, sometimes
behaving like a particle and sometimes as a wave. He gave a formula connecting their mass, velocity, momentum
(particle characteristics), with their wavelength and frequency [wave characteristics)! In 1927 Thomson, and
Davisson and Germer, in separate experiments, showed that electrons did behave like waves with a wavelength
which agreed with that given by de Broglie’s formula. Their experiment was on diffraction of electrons through
crystalline solids, in which the regular arrangement of atoms acted like a grating. Very soon, diffraction
experiments with other ‘particles’ such as neutrons and protons were performed and these too confirmed with
de Broglie’s formula. This confirmed wave—particle duality as an established principle of physics. Here was a
principle, physicists thought, which explained all the phenomena mentioned above not only for light but also
for the so—called particles.

But there was no basic theoretical foundation for wave—particle duality. De Broglie’s proposal was
merely a qualitative argument based on symmetry of nature. Wave—particle duality was at best a principle, not
an outcome of a sound fundamental theory. It is true that all experiments whatever agreed with de Broglie
formula. But physics does not work that way. On the one hand, it needs experimental confirmation, while on
the other hand, it also needs sound theoretical basis for the models proposed. This was developed over the
next two decades. Dirac developed his theory of radiation in about 1928, and Heisenberg and Pauli gave it a
firm footing by 1930. Tomonaga, Schwinger, and Feynman, in late 1940s, produced further refinements and
cleared the theory of inconsistencies which were noticed. All these theories mainly put wave—particle duality
on a theoretical footing.

Although the story continues, it grows more and more complex and beyond the scope of this note. But
we have here the essential structure of what happened, and let us be satisfied with it at the moment. Now it
is regarded as a natural consequence of present theories of physics that electromagnetic radiation as well as
particles of matter exhibit both wave and particle properties in different experiments, and sometimes even in
the different parts of the same experiment.

413

2019-20