I42

PHYSICS

 

B‘ C

Fig 7. 1 Translational (sliding) motion of a block down
an inclined plane.
(Any point like P1 or P2 of the block moves
with the same velocity at any instant of time.)

block sliding down an inclined plane without any
sidewise movement. The block is taken as a rigid
body. Its motion down the plane is such that all
the particles of the body are moving together,
i.e. they have the same velocity at any instant
of time. The rigid body here is in pure
translational motion (Fig. 7. 1).

In pure translational motion at any
instant of time, all particles of the body have
the same velocity.

Consider now the rolling motion of a solid
metallic or wooden cylinder down the same
inclined plane (Fig. 7.2). The rigid body in this
problem, namely the cylinder, shifts from the
top to the bottom of the inclined plane, and thus,
seems to have translational motion. But as Fig.
7 .2 shows, all its particles are not moving with
the same velocity at any instant. The body,
therefore, is not in pure translational motion.
Its motion is translational plus ‘something else.’

    

B C

Fig. 7.2 Rolling motion of a cylinder. It is not pure
translational motion. Points P1, P2, P3 and P4
have different velocities (shown by arrows)
at any instant of time. In fact, the velocity of
the point of contact P3 is zero at any instant,
if the cylinder rolls without slipping.

In order to understand what this ‘something
else’ is, let us take a rigid body so constrained
that it cannot have translational motion. The

2019-20

most common way to constrain a rigid body so
that it does not have translational motion is to
fix it along a straight line. The only possible
motion of such a rigid body is rotation. The line
or fixed axis about which the body is rotating is
its axis of rotation. If you look around, you will
come across many examples of rotation about
an axis, a ceiling fan, a potter’s wheel, a giant
wheel in a fair, a merry-go-round and so on (Fig
7.3(a) and (b)).

 

(b)
Fig. 7.3 Rotation about a ﬁxed axis

(a) A ceiling fan
(b) A potter’s wheel.

Let us try to understand what rotation is,
what characterises rotation. You may notice that
in rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed axis,