Electromagnetic
Induction

   

or current in a loop is through a change in the
loops orientation or a change in its effective area.
As the coil rotates in a magnetic field B, the
effective area of the loop (the face perpendicular
to the field) is A cos 0, where 9 is the angle
between A and B. This method of producing a
ﬂux change is the principle of operation of a
simple ac generator. An ac generator converts
mechanical energy into electrical energy.

The basic elements of an ac generator are
shown in Fig. 6. 16. It consists of a coil mounted
on a rotor shaft. The axis of rotation of the coil Slip
is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic rings<
field. The coil (called armature) is mechanically
rotated in the uniform magnetic field by some
external means. The rotation of the coil causes
the magnetic ﬂux through it to change, so an
emf is induced in the coil. The ends of the coil
are connected to an external circuit by means
of slip rings and brushes.

When the coil is rotated with a constant
angular speed a), the angle 0 between the magnetic field vector B and the
area vectorA of the coil at any instant tis 9 = wt (assuming 0 = 0° at t= 0).
As a result, the effective area of the coil exposed to the magnetic ﬁeld lines
changes with time, and from Eq. (6.1), the ﬂux at any time tis

(PB = BA cos 0 = BA cos wt

From Faraday’s law, the induced emf for the rotating coil of N turns is
then,

Coil

Alternating emf

Carbon
brushes

FIGURE 6.16 AC Generator

d 953
dt

Thus, the instantaneous value of the emf is

8=NBAwsinaJt (6.21)

where NBAa) is the maximum value of the emf, which occurs when
sin wtzil. If we denote NBAa) as 80, then

8 = 80 sin (at (6.22)

Since the value of the sine fuction varies between + 1 and —1, the sign, or
polarity of the emf changes with time. Note from Fig. 6.17 that the emf
has its extremum value when 0 = 90° or 0 = 270°, as the change of ﬂux is
greatest at these points.

The direction of the current changes periodically and therefore the current
is called alternating current (ac). Since a)= 27W, Eq (6.22) can be written as

8 = 80sin 27c vt (6.23)

where v is the frequency of revolution of the generator’s coil.
Note that Eq. (6.22) and (6.23) give the instantaneous value of the emf
and 8 varies between +80 and —80 periodically. We shall learn how to
determine the time-averaged value for the alternating voltage and current
in the next chapter. 225

8=—N

 

= — NBAi(cos wt)
dt

2019-20