358

PHYSICS

 

d2X dx

mdt2 +bdt +kx— Focos codt (14.37b)
This is the equation of an oscillator of mass
m on which a periodic force of (angular)
frequency cod is applied. The oscillator, initially,
oscillates with its natural frequency a). When
we apply the external periodic force, the
oscillations with the natural frequency die out,
and then the body oscillates with the (angular)
frequency of the external periodic force. Its
displacement, after the natural oscillations die

out, is given by

x(t) = Acos (wdt + ¢) (14.38)

where tis the time measured from the moment
when we apply the periodic force.

The amplitude A is a function of the forced
frequency cod and the natural frequency (0.
Analysis shows that it is given by

 

 

FD
A _ 2 1/2
{m2 (wz —(031) + aﬁbz} (14.393)
and tan (1) = —v0 (14.39b)
wdxo

where m is the mass of the particle and v0 and
x0 are the velocity and the displacement of the
particle at time t = 0, which is the moment when
we apply the periodic force. Equation (14.39)
shows that the amplitude of the forced oscillator
depends on the (angular) frequency of the
driving force. We can see a different behaviour
of the oscillator when cod is far from a) and when
it is close to a). We consider these two cases.

(a) Small Damping, Driving Frequency far
from Natural Frequency : In this case, cod b will
be much smaller than m(w2 —a):), and we can
neglect that term. Then Eq. (14.39) reduces to

F
A = —O (14.40)

m(w2—a)f,)

Fig. 14.21 shows the dependence of the
displacement amplitude of an oscillator on the
angular frequency of the driving force for
different amounts of damping present in the
system. It may be noted that in all cases the
amplitude is the greatest when cod /w = 1. The
curves in this figure show that smaller the
damping, the taller and narrower is the
resonance peak.

2019-20

 

     

b=50g 5 (least

 

Amplitude

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.6 0.8 1.0 1 .2 1 .4
cod/w

Fig. 14.21 The displacement amplitude of a forced
oscillator as a function of the angular
frequency of the driving force. The

amplitude is the greatest at wd/ (0 =1 , the
resonance condition. The three curves
correspond to different extents of damping
present in the system. The curves 1 and
3 correspond to minimum and maximum
damping in the system.

If we go on changing the driving frequency,
the amplitude tends to infinity when it equals
the natural frequency. But this is the ideal case
of zero damping, a case which never arises in a
real system as the damping is never perfectly
zero. You must have experienced in a swing that
when the timing of your push exactly matches
with the time period of the swing, your swing
gets the maximum amplitude. This amplitude
is large, but not infinity, because there is always
some damping in your swing. This will become
clear in the (b).

(b) Driving Frequency Close to Natural

Frequency : If cod is very close to a), m ((02—503)

would be much less than cod b, for any reasonable
value of b, then Eq. (14.39) reduces to

A = Fa (14.41)
wdb

This makes it clear that the maximum
possible amplitude for a given driving frequency
is governed by the driving frequency and the
damping, and is never inﬁnity. The phenomenon
of increase in amplitude when the driving force
is close to the natural frequency of the oscillator
is called resonance.

In our daily life, we encounter phenomena
which involve resonance. Your experience with