Electromagnetic
Induction

 

MIGRATION OF BIRDS

The migratory pattern of birds is one of the mysteries in the field of biology, and indeed all
of science. For example, every winter birds from Siberia ﬂy unerringly to water spots in the
Indian subcontinent. There has been a suggestion that electromagnetic induction may
provide a clue to these migratory patterns. The earth’s magnetic field has existed throughout
evolutionary history. It would be of great benefit to migratory birds to use this field to
determine the direction. As far as we know birds contain no ferromagnetic material. So
electromagnetic induction seems to be the only reasonable mechanism to determine
direction. Consider the optimal case where the magnetic field B, the velocity of the bird v,
and two relevant points of its anatomy separated by a distance I, all three are mutually
perpendicular. From the formula for motional emf, Eq. (6.5),

8=Blv
Taking B = 4 X 10-5T, 1: 2 cm wide, and v = 10 m/s, we obtain
8 =4X 10‘5X2X lO‘ZX 10V=8X IO‘BV

=8uV

This extremely small potential difference suggests that our hypothesis is of doubtful
validity. Certain kinds of fish are able to detect small potential differences. However, in
these fish, special cells have been identified which detect small voltage differences. In birds
no such cells have been identified. Thus, the migration patterns of birds continues to remain

a mystery.

SUMMARY

1. The magnetic ﬂux through a surface of areaA placed in a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld B is defined as,

(DB = B.A= BA cos 6

where 9 is the angle between B and A.

2. Faraday’s laws of induction imply that the emf induced in a coil of N
turns is directly related to the rate of change of ﬂux through it,

E = —N %
dt
Here 473 is the ﬂux linked with one turn of the coil. If the circuit is
closed, a current I = 8 / R is set up in it, where R is the resistance of the
circuit.

3. Lenz’s law states that the polarity of the induced emf is such that it
tends to produce a current which opposes the change in magnetic ﬂux
that produces it. The negative sign in the expression for Faraday’s law
indicates this fact.

4. When a metal rod of length l is placed normal to a uniform magnetic
field B and moved with a velocity v perpendicular to the field, the
induced emf [called motional emf) across its ends is

£=Blv

5. Changing magnetic fields can set up current loops in nearby metal
[any conductor] bodies. They dissipate electrical energy as heat. Such
currents are eddy currents.
6. Inductance is the ratio of the ﬂux—linkage to current. It is equal to Ndﬁ/I. 227

2019-20