Nuclei

inﬂuences only nucleons close to it is also referred to as saturation
property of the nuclear force.

(iii) A very heavy nucleus, say A = 240, has lower binding energy per
nucleon compared to that of a nucleus with A = 120. Thus if a
nucleus A = 240 breaks into two A = 120 nuclei, nucleons get more
tightly bound. This implies energy would be released in the process.
It has very important implications for energy production through
ﬁssion, to be discussed later in Section 13.7.1.

(iv) Consider two very light nuclei (Ag 10) joining to form a heavier
nucleus. The binding energy per nucleon of the fused heavier nuclei
is more than the binding energy per nucleon of the lighter nuclei.
This means that the ﬁnal system is more tightly bound than the initial
system. Again energy would be released in such a process of

fusion. This is the energy source of sun, to be discussed later in
Section 13.7.3.

13.5 NUCLEAR FORCE

The force that determines the motion of atomic electrons is the familiar
Coulomb force. In Section 13.4, we have seen that for average mass
nuclei the binding energy per nucleon is approximately 8 MeV, which is
much larger than the binding energy in atoms. Therefore, to bind a
nucleus together there must be a strong attractive force of a totally
different kind. It must be strong enough to overcome the repulsion
between the (positively charged) protons and to bind both protons and
neutrons into the tiny nuclear volume. We have already seen

 

that the constancy of binding energy per nucleon can be
understood in terms of its short-range. Many features of the
nuclear binding force are summarised below. These are
obtained from avariety of experiments carried out during 1930

 

to 1950.
(i) The nuclear force is much stronger than the Coulomb force
acting between charges or the gravitational forces between

 

masses. The nuclear binding force has to dominate over
the Coulomb repulsive force between protons inside the
nucleus. This happens only because the nuclear force is

Potential energy (MeV)

 

 

 

much stronger than the coulomb force. The gravitational
force is much weaker than even Coulomb force.

(ii) The nuclear force between two nucleons falls rapidly to
zero as their distance is more than a few femtometres. This
leads to saturation of forces in a medium or a large-sized

2 3
r (fm)

FIGURE 13.2 Potential energy
of a pair of nucleons as a
function of their separation.
For a separation greater

nucleus, which is the reason for the constancy of the than r”, the force is attractive

binding energy per nucleon. and for separations less
A rough plot of the potential energy between two nucleons than to. the force is
as a function of distance is shown in the Fig. 13.2. The Strongly r€THIS“?-

potential energy is a minimum at a distance r0 of about
0.8 fm. This means that the force is attractive for distances larger

than 0.8 fm and repulsive if they are separated by distances less
than 0.8 fm.

2019-20

445