IIO87CHIO

CHAPTER TEN

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

Introduction
Pressure

Streamline ﬂow
Bernoulli’s principle
Viscosity

Surface tension

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises
Appendix

 

10. 1 INTRODUCTION

In this chapter, we shall study some common physical
properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can ﬂow
and are therefore, called ﬂuids. It is this property that
distinguishes liquids and gases from solids in a basic way.

Fluids are everywhere around us. Earth has an envelop of
air and two-thirds of its surface is covered with water. Water
is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian
body constitute mostly of water. All the processes occurring
in living beings including plants are mediated by ﬂuids. Thus
understanding the behaviour and properties of ﬂuids is
important.

How are ﬂuids different from solids? What is common in
liquids and gases? Unlike a solid, a ﬂuid has no definite
shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,
whereas a gas fills the entire volume of its container. We
have learnt in the previous chapter that the volume of solids
can be changed by stress. The volume of solid, liquid or gas
depends on the stress or pressure acting on it. When we
talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pressure. The difference between gases
and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to change of external pressure is rather small.
In other words solids and liquids have much lower
compressibility as compared to gases.

Shear stress can change the shape of a solid keeping its
volume fixed. The key property of ﬂuids is that they offer
very little resistance to shear stress; their shape changes by
application of very small shear stress. The shearing stress
of ﬂuids is about million times smaller than that of solids.

10.2 PRESSURE

A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Our
skin, however, remains intact when a blunt object with a
wider contact area (say the back of a spoon) is pressed against
it with the same force. If an elephant were to step on a man’s
chest, his ribs would crack. A circus performer across whose

2019-20