64

i Physics

EXAMPLE 2.4

Add the work done in steps (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). The total work
required is

=43;want—area

 

 

The work done depends only on the arrangement of the charges, and
not how they are assembled. By definition, this is the total
electrostatic energy of the charges.

(Students may try calculating same work/energy by taking charges
in any other order they desire and convince themselves that the energy
will remain the same.)

(b) The extra work necessary to bring a charge qO to the point E when
the four charges are at A, B, C and D is qO X (electrostatic potential at
E due to the charges at A, B, C and D). The electrostatic potential at
E is clearly zero since potential due to A and C is cancelled by that
due to B and D. Hence, no work is required to bring any charge to

point E.

2.8 POTENTIAL ENERGY IN AN EXTERNAL FIELD
2.8. 1 Potential energy of a single charge

In Section 2.7, the source of the electric field was speciﬁed — the charges
and their locations - and the potential energy of the system of those charges
was determined. In this section, we ask a related but a distinct question.
What is the potential energy of a charge q in a given ﬁeld? This question
was, in fact, the starting point that led us to the notion of the electrostatic
potential (Sections 2.1 and 2.2). But here we address this question again
to clarify in what way it is different from the discussion in Section 2. 7.
The main difference is that we are now concerned with the potential
energy of a charge (or charges) in an external ﬁeld. The external ﬁeld E is
not produced by the given charge(s) whose potential energy we wish to
calculate. E is produced by sources external to the given charge(s).The
external sources may be known, but often they are unknown or
unspeciﬁed; what is speciﬁed is the electric ﬁeld E or the electrostatic
potential Vdue to the external sources. We assume that the charge q
does not signiﬁcantly affect the sources producing the external ﬁeld. This
is true if q is very small, or the external sources are held fixed by other
unspeciﬁed forces. Even if q is ﬁnite, its inﬂuence on the external sources
may still be ignored in the situation when very strong sources far away
at inﬁnity produce a ﬁnite field E in the region of interest. Note again that
we are interested in determining the potential energy of a given charge q
(and later, a system of charges) in the external ﬁeld; we are not interested
in the potential energy of the sources producing the external electric ﬁeld.
The external electric ﬁeld E and the corresponding external potential
Vmay vary from point to point. By definition, Vat a point P is the work
done in bringing a unit positive charge from inﬁnity to the point P.

2019-20