42

i Physics

 

 

 

SUMMARY

Electric and magnetic forces determine the properties of atoms,
molecules and bulk matter.

From simple experiments on frictional electricity, one can infer that
there are two types of charges in nature; and that like charges repel
and unlike charges attract. By convention, the charge on a glass rod
rubbed with silk is positive; that on a plastic rod rubbed with fur is
then negative.

Conductors allow movement of electric charge through them, insulators
do not. In metals, the mobile charges are electrons; in electrolytes
both positive and negative ions are mobile.

Electric charge has three basic properties; quantisation, additivity
and conservation.

Quantisation of electric charge means that total charge (q) of a body
is always an integral multiple of a basic quantum of charge (e) i.e.,
q = n e, where n = 0, 11, i2, 13, Proton and electron have charges
+e, —e, respectively. For macroscopic charges for which n is a very large
number, quantisation of charge can be ignored.

Additivity of electric charges means that the total charge of a system
is the algebraic sum (i.e., the sum taking into account proper signs)
of all individual charges in the system.

Conservation of electric charges means that the total charge of an
isolated system remains unchanged with time. This means that when
bodies are charged through friction, there is a transfer of electric charge
from one body to another, but no creation or destruction of charge.

Coulomb’s Law: The mutual electrostatic force between two point
charges q1 and q2 is proportional to the product q1q2 and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance r21 separating them.
Mathematically,

k (qiq2) i.

F21 = force on q2 due to (11 = r2 21
21

 

where £21 is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to q2 and k = 41w
0

is the constant of proportionality.

In SI units, the unit of charge is coulomb. The experimental value of
the constant 80 is

so = 8.854 x 10~12 c2 N~1 m”2
The approximate value of k is
k=9>< 109Nm2C”2
The ratio of electric force and gravitational force between a proton

and an electron is
2

k—e E 2.4 x 1039

G memp

Superposition Principle: The principle is based on the property that the
forces with which two charges attract or repel each other are not
affected by the presence of a third (or more] additional charge[s]. For
an assembly of charges q1, q2, q3, the force on any charge, say ql, is

2019-20