i Physics

Surface
charge density a-

 

lA>+++++++++++

geometrical configuration (shape, size, separation) of the system of two
conductors. [As we shall see later, it also depends on the nature of the
insulator (dielectric) separating the two conductors] The SI unit of
capacitance is 1 farad (=1 coulomb volt‘l) or 1 F = 1 C V‘l. A capacitor
with fixed capacitance is symbolically shown as —| I—, while the one with
variable capacitance is shown as ;Hﬁ.

Equation (2.38) shows that for large C, Vis small for a given Q. This
means a capacitor with large capacitance can hold large amount of charge
Q at a relatively small V. This is of practical importance. High potential
difference implies strong electric field around the conductors. A strong
electric field can ionise the surrounding air and accelerate the charges so
produced to the oppositely charged plates, thereby neutralising the charge
on the capacitor plates, at least partly. In other words, the charge of the
capacitor leaks away due to the reduction in insulating power of the
intervening medium.

The maximum electric field that a dielectric medium can withstand
without break-down (of its insulating property) is called its dielectric
strength; for air it is about 3 X 106 Vm‘l. For a separation between
conductors of the order of 1 cm or so, this field corresponds to a potential
difference of 3 X 104 V between the conductors. Thus, for a capacitor to
store a large amount of charge without leaking, its capacitance should
be high enough so that the potential difference and hence the electric
field do not exceed the break-down limits. Put differently, there is a limit
to the amount of charge that can be stored on a given capacitor without
signiﬁcant leaking. In practice, a farad is a very big unit; the most common
units are its sub-multiples 1 11F = 1045 F, 1 nF = 10—9 F, 1 pF = 10—12 F,
etc. Besides its use in storing charge, a capacitor is a key element of most
ac circuits with important functions, as described in Chapter 7.

2. 12 THE PARALLEL PLATE CAPACITOR

A parallel plate capacitor consists of two large plane parallel conducting
plates separated by a small distance (Fig. 2.25). We first take the
intervening medium between the plates to be

1 Area A vacuum. The effect of a dielectric medium between
¢ the plates is discussed in the next section. Let A be

the area of each plate and d the separation between
them. The two plates have charges Q and —Q. Since
dis much smaller than the linear dimension of the

l i l j l plates (d2 << A), we can use the result on electric
E

charge density — 0'

d field by an infinite plane sheet of uniform surface
charge density (Section 1.15). Plate 1 has surface
charge density a = Q/A and plate 2 has a surface
charge density —6. Using Eq. (1.33), the electric field
in different regions is:

Outer region I (region above the plate 1),

FIGURE 2.25 The parallel plate capacitor.

74

0' 0'

E = — —— = 0
2.90 2.90 (2'39)

2019-20