l Physics

 

instruments such as telescopes or microscopes is limited due to the
phenomenon of diffraction. Indeed the colours that you see when a CD is
viewed is due to diffraction effects. We will now discuss the phenomenon
of diffraction.

10.6.1 The single slit

In the discussion of Young’s experiment, we stated that a single narrow
slit acts as a new source from which light spreads out. Even before Young,
early experimenters — including Newton — had noticed that light spreads
out from narrow holes and slits. It seems to turn around corners and
enter regions where we would expect a shadow. These effects, known as
diffraction, can only be properly understood using wave ideas. After all,
you are hardly surprised to hear sound waves from someone talking
around a corner!

When the double slit in Young’s experiment is replaced by a single
narrow slit (illuminated by a monochromatic source), a broad pattern
with a central bright region is seen. On both sides, there are alternate
dark and bright regions, the intensity becoming weaker away from the
centre (Fig. 10.16). To understand this, go to Fig. 10.1 5, which shows a
parallel beam of light falling normally on a single slit LN of width a. The
diffracted light goes on to meet a screen. The midpoint of the slit is M.

A straight line through M perpendicular to the slit plane meets the
screen at C. We want the intensity at any point P on the screen. As before,
straight lines j oining P to the different points L,M,N, etc., can be treated as
parallel, making an angle Owith the normal MC.

The basic idea is to divide the slit into much smaller parts, and add
their contributions at P with the proper phase differences. We are treating
different parts of the wavefront at the slit as secondary sources. Because
the incoming wavefront is parallel to the plane of the slit, these sources
are in phase.

The path difference NP — LP between the two edges of the slit can be
calculated exactly as for Young’s experiment. From Fig. 10.15,

NP—LP=NQ
=asin0

z a 0 (for smaller angles) (10.2 1)

Similarly, if two points M1 and M2 in the slit plane are separated by y, the
path difference M2P — MlP z ye. We now have to sum up equal, coherent
contributions from a large number of sources, each with a different phase.
This calculation was made by Fresnel using integral calculus, so we omit
it here. The main features of the diffraction pattern can be understood by
simple arguments.

At the central point C on the screen, the angle 0 is zero. All path

differences are zero and hence all the parts of the slit contribute in phase.
368 This gives maximum intensity at C. Experimental observation shown in

2019-20