10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Electric Charges
and Fields

 

the vector sum of the force on q1 due to q2, the force on q1 due to q3,
and so on. For each pair, the force is given by the Coulomb’s law for
two charges stated earlier.

The electric field E at a point due to a charge configuration is the
force on a small positive test charge q placed at the point divided by
the magnitude of the charge. Electric field due to a point charge q has
a magnitude | q | /4nsor2; it is radially outwards from q, if q is positive,
and radially inwards if q is negative. Like Coulomb force, electric field
also satisﬁes superposition principle.

An electric field line is a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent
at each point on the curve gives the direction of electric field at that
point. The relative closeness of field lines indicates the relative strength
of electric field at different points; they crowd near each other in regions
of strong electric field and are far apart where the electric field is
weak. In regions of constant electric field, the field lines are uniformly
spaced parallel straight lines.

Some of the important properties of field lines are: (i) Field lines are
continuous curves without any breaks. [ii] Two field lines cannot cross
each other. (iii) Electrostatic field lines start at positive charges and
end at negative charges —they cannot form closed loops.

An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite charges q and —q
separated by some distance 2a. Its dipole moment vector p has
magnitude 2qa and is in the direction of the dipole axis from —q to q.

Field of an electric dipole in its equatorial plane [i.e., the plane
perpendicular to its axis and passing through its centre) at a distance
r from the centre:

 

_p 1
E: —
4mg, (a2 + r2)3/2
5%, for r >> a
47csor

Dipole electric field on the axis at a distance r from the centre:

E: 25" 22
4n€0(r —a)
5 _2p 3 for r >> a
41:80r

The l / r3 dependence of dipole electric fields should be noted in contrast
to the 1 / r2 dependence of electric field due to a point charge.

In a uniform electric field E, a dipole experiences a torque 1: given by
r=PxE
but experiences no net force.
The ﬂux Aq) of electric field E through a small area element AS is
given by
Aq) = E-AS
The vector area element AS is
AS = AS f1

where AS is the magnitude of the area element and ﬂ is normal to the
area element, which can be considered planar for sufficiently small AS.

2019-20

43