i Physics

 

 

3. 1 1 CELLS, EMF, INTERNAL RESISTANCE

We have already mentioned that a simple device to maintain a steady
current in an electric circuit is the electrolytic cell. Basically a cell has
two electrodes, called the positive (P) and the negative (N), as shown in
Fig. 3.18. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in the

c I R I D
I P N I
Electrolyte
(a)
m
Symbol
(b)

FIGURE 3.18 (a) Sketch of
an electrolyte cell with
positive terminal P and

negative terminal N. The

gap between the electrodes

is exaggerated for clarity. A
and B are points in the

electrolyte typically close to

P and N. (b) the symbol for

a cell. + referring to P and

— referring to the N
electrode. Electrical
connections to the cell are
made at P and N.

solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte. The
positive electrode has a potential difference V+ (V+ > 0) between
itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked
A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative
potential — (V_ ) (V_ 2 0) relative to the electrolyte adjacent to it,
marked as B in the ﬁgure. When there is no current, the electrolyte
has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference
between P and N is V+ — (—V_) = V+ + V_ . This difference is called the
electromotive force (emf) of the cell and is denoted by 8. Thus

8: V++V_> o (3.55)

Note that 8 is, actually, a potential difference and not a force. The
name emf, however, is used because of historical reasons, and was
given at a time when the phenomenon was not understood properly.

To understand the significance of 8, consider a resistor R
connected across the cell (Fig. 3.18). A current I ﬂows across R
from C to D. As explained before, a steady current is maintained
because current ﬂows from N to P through the electrolyte. Clearly,
across the electrolyte the same current ﬂows through the electrolyte
but from N to P, whereas through R, it ﬂows from P to N.

The electrolyte through which a current ﬂows has a finite
resistance r, called the internal resistance. Consider first the
situation when R is infinite so that I = V/ R = 0, where V is the
potential difference between P and N. Now,

V= Potential difference between P and A

+ Potential difference between A and B
+ Potential difference between B and N
= 8 (3.56)
Thus, emf 8 is the potential difference between the positive and
negative electrodes in an open circuit, i.e., when no current is
ﬂowing through the cell.

If however R is finite, I is not zero. In that case the potential

difference between P and N is

V=V++V_—Ir

=8—Ir

(3.57)

Note the negative sign in the expression (I r) for the potential difference
between A and B. This is because the current I ﬂows from B to A in the
electrolyte.

In practical calculations, internal resistances of cells in the circuit
may be neglected when the current I is such that 8 >> I r. The actual
values of the internal resistances of cells vary from cell to cell. The internal
resistance of dry cells, however, is much higher than the common

110

electrolytic cells.

2019-20