266

PHYSICS

Suppose that we move the bar by a small
distance d as shown. Since the area of the
surface increases, the system now has more
energy, this means that some work has been
done against an internal force. Let this internal
force be F, the work done by the applied force is
F-d = Fd. From conservation of energy, this is
stored as additional energy in the film. If the
surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the
extra area is 2dl. A film has two sides and the
liquid in between, so there are two surfaces and
the extra energy is

S (2dl) = Fd (10.21)
Or, S=Fd/2dl= F/21 (10.22)

This quantity S is the magnitude of surface
tension. It is equal to the surface energy per unit
area of the liquid interface and is also equal to
the force per unit length exerted by the ﬂuid on
the movable bar.

So far we have talked about the surface of one
liquid. More generally, we need to consider ﬂuid
surface in contact with other ﬂuids or solid
surfaces. The surface energy in that case depends
on the materials on both sides of the surface. For
example, if the molecules of the materials attract
each other, surface energy is reduced while if they
repel each other the surface energy is increased.
Thus, more appropriately, the surface energy is
the energy of the interface between two materials
and depends on both of them.

We make the following observations from
above:

(i) Surface tension is a force per unit length
(or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of the interface between the plane
of the liquid and any other substance; it also
is the extra energy that the molecules at the
interface have as compared to molecules in
the interior.

(ii) At any point on the interface besides the
boundary, we can draw a line and imagine

2019-20

equal and opposite surface tension forces S
per unit length of the line acting
perpendicular to the line, in the plane of the
interface. The line is in equilibrium. To be
more specific, imagine a line of atoms or
molecules at the surface. The atoms to the
left pull the line towards them; those to the
right pull it towards them! This line of atoms
is in equilibrium under tension. If the line
really marks the end of the interface, as in
Figure 10.16 (a) and (b) there is only the force
S per unit length acting inwards.

Table 10.3 gives the surface tension of various
liquids. The value of surface tension depends
on temperature. Like viscosity, the surface
tension of a liquid usually falls with
temperature.

Table 10.3 Surface tension of some liquids at the
temperatures indicated with the
heats of the vaporisation

 

Surface Heat of
Tension vaporisation
(N/m) (kJ/mol)

Helium —270 0.000239 0.115
Oxygen —183 0.0132 7.1
Ethanol 20 0.0227 40.6
Water 20 0.0727 44.16
Mercury 20 0.4355 63.2

A ﬂuid will stick to a solid surface if the
surface energy between ﬂuid and the solid is
smaller than the sum of surface energies
between solid-air, and ﬂuid-air. Now there is
attraction between the solid surface and the
liquid. It can be directly measured
experimentaly as schematically shown in Fig.
10.18. A ﬂat vertical glass plate, below which a
vessel of some liquid is kept, forms one arm of
the balance. The plate is balanced by weights