96

PHYSICS

 

The retarding force, by the second law of

motion, is
= 0.04 kg X 6750 m s'2 = 270 N

The actual resistive force, and therefore,
retardation of the bullet may not be uniform. The
answer therefore, only indicates the average
resistive force. 4

F Example 5.3 The motion of a particle of

1

mass m is described by y = H! -‘v- 7 g}! , . Find

 

the force acting on the particle.

Answer We know
1

=ut+— t2
y 29
Now,
dy

v=—=u+ t
dt 9

l t‘ lei-ﬂ-

acce era ion, (it

Then the force is given by Eq. (5.5)
F = ma = mg
Thus the given equation describes the motion
of a particle under acceleration due to gravity
and y is the position coordinate in the direction

of g. 4

Impulse

We sometimes encounter examples where a large
force acts for a very short duration producing a
finite change in momentum of the body. For
example, when a ball hits a wall and bounces
back, the force on the ball by the wall acts for a
very short time when the two are in contact, yet
the force is large enough to reverse the momentum
of the ball. Often, in these situations, the force
and the time duration are difficult to ascertain
separately. However, the product of force and time,
which is the change in momentum of the body
remains a measurable quantity. This product is
called impulse:

Impulse = Force X time duration
= Change in momentum (5.7)

A large force acting for a short time to produce a
finite change in momentum is called an impulsive
force. In the history of science, impulsive forces
were put in a conceptually different category from

2019-20

ordinary forces. Newtonian mechanics has no
such distinction. Impulsive force is like any other
force — except that it is large and acts for a short
time.

> Example 5.4 A batsman hits back a ball
straight in the direction of the bowler without
changing its initial speed of 12 m S’l.

If the mass of the ball is O. 15 kg, determine
the impulse imparted to the ball. (Assume
linear motion of the ball)

 

Answer Change in momentum
= 0.15 X 12—(—0.15X12)

= 3.6Ns,

Impulse = 3.6 N s,
in the direction from the batsman to the bowler.

This is an example where the force on the ball
by the batsman and the time of contact of the
ball and the bat are difficult to know, but the
impulse is readily calculated. 4

5.6 NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION

The second law relates the external force on a
body to its acceleration. What is the origin of the
external force on the body ? What agency
provides the external force ? The simple answer
in Newtonian mechanics is that the external
force on a body always arises due to some other
body. Consider a pair of bodies A and B. B gives
rise to an external force on A. A natural question
is: Does A in turn give rise to an external force
on B ? In some examples, the answer seems
clear. If you press a coiled spring, the spring is
compressed by the force of your hand. The
compressed spring in turn exerts a force on your
hand and you can feel it. But what if the bodies
are not in contact ? The earth pulls a stone
downwards due to gravity. Does the stone exert
a force on the earth ? The answer is not obvious
since we hardly see the effect of the stone on the
earth. The answer according to Newton is: Yes,
the stone does exert an equal and opposite force
on the earth. We do not notice it since the earth
is very massive and the effect of a small force on
its motion is negligible.

Thus, according to Newtonian mechanics,
force never occurs singly in nature. Force is the
mutual interaction between two bodies. Forces