Wave Optics

 

= Sim” =tani 10 36
cosiB B ( ' )

 

This is known as Brewster’s law.

Example 10.9 Unpolarised light is incident on a plane glass surface.
What should be the angle of incidence so that the reﬂected and
refracted rays are perpendicular to each other?

Solution For i + r to be equal to n/Z, we should have tan £3 = u = 1.5.
This gives iB = 57°. This is the Brewster’s angle for air to glass
interface.

For simplicity, we have discussed scattering of light by 90°, and
reﬂection at the Brewster angle. In this special situation, one of the two
perpendicular components of the electric field is zero. At other angles,
both components are present but one is stronger than the other. There is
no stable phase relationship between the two perpendicular components
since these are derived from two perpendicular components of an
unpolarised beam. When such light is viewed through a rotating analyser,
one sees a maximum and a minimum of intensity but not complete
darkness. This kind of light is called partially polarised.

Let us try to understand the situation. When an unpolarised beam of
light is incident at the Brewster’s angle on an interface of two media, only
part of light with electric field vector perpendicular to the plane of
incidence will be reﬂected. Now by using a good polariser, if we completely
remove all the light with its electric vector perpendicular to the plane of
incidence and let this light be incident on the surface of the prism at
Brewster’s angle, you will then observe no reﬂection and there will be
total transmission of light.

We began this chapter by pointing out that there are some phenomena
which can be explained only by the wave theory. In order to develop a
proper understanding, we first described how some phenomena like
reﬂection and refraction, which were studied on this basis of Ray Optics
in Chapter 9, can also be understood on the basis of Wave Optics. Then
we described Young’s double slit experiment which was a turning point
in the study of optics. Finally, we described some associated points such
as diffraction, resolution, polarisation, and validity of ray optics. In the
next chapter, you will see how new experiments led to new theories at
the turn of the century around 1900 AD.

SUMMARY

1. Huygens’ principle tells us that each point on a wavefront is a source
of secondary waves, which add up to give the wavefront at a later time.

2. Huygens’ construction tells us that the new wavefront is the forward
envelope of the secondary waves. When the speed of light is
independent of direction, the secondary waves are spherical. The rays
are then perpendicular to both the wavefronts and the time of travel

2019-20

6‘01 EI’IJWVXQ

381