Magnetism and

Mutter

It must not be assumed that there is a giant bar magnet deep inside the earth which is
causing the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. Although there are large deposits of iron inside the earth,
it is highly unlikely that a large solid block of iron stretches from the magnetic north pole to
the magnetic south pole. The earth’s core is very hot and molten, and the ions of iron and
nickel are responsible for earth’s magnetism. This hypothesis seems very probable. Moon,
which has no molten core, has no magnetic field, Venus has a slower rate of rotation, and a
weaker magnetic ﬁeld, while Jupiter, which has the fastest rotation rate among planets, has
a fairly strong magnetic ﬁeld. However, the precise mode of these circulating currents and
the energy needed to sustain them are not very well understood. These are several open
questions which form an important area of continuing research.

The variation of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld with position is also an interesting area of
study. Charged particles emitted by the sun ﬂow towards the earth and beyond, in a stream
called the solar wind. Their motion is affected by the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, and in turn, they
affect the pattern of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. The pattern of magnetic ﬁeld near the poles is
quite different from that in other regions of the earth.

The variation of earth’s magnetic ﬁeld with time is no less fascinating. There are short
term variations taking place over centuries and long term variations taking place over a
period of a million years. In a span of 240 years from 1580 to 1820 AD, over which records
are available, the magnetic declination at London has been found to change by 35°,
suggesting that the magnetic poles inside the earth change position with time. On the scale
of a million years, the earth’s magnetic ﬁelds has been found to reverse its direction. Basalt
contains iron, and basalt is emitted during volcanic activity. The little iron magnets inside it
align themselves parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld at that place as the basalt cools and solidiﬁes.
Geological studies of basalt containing such pieces of magnetised region have provided
evidence for the change of direction of earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, several times in the past.

5.5 MAGNETISATION AND MAGNETIC INTENSITY

The earth abounds with a bewildering variety of elements and compounds.
In addition, we have been synthesising new alloys, compounds and even
elements. One would like to classify the magnetic properties of these
substances. In the present section, we deﬁne and explain certain terms
which will help us to carry out this exercise.

We have seen that a circulating electron in an atom has a magnetic

moment. In a bulk material, these moments add up vectorially and they
can give a net magnetic moment which is non-zero. We define
magnetisation M of a sample to be equal to its net magnetic moment per

 

unit volume:
m
M = f (5.1 1)

M is a vector with dimensions L‘1 A and is measured in a units of A m‘l.

Consider a long solenoid of n turns per unit length and carrying a

current I. The magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid was shown to

be given by 189

2019-20