68

 

 

i Physics

the situation in this case is more involved — the movement of the charge
carriers is affected both by the external electric ﬁeld as also by the
so-called chemical forces (see Chapter 3). We shall restrict our discussion
to metallic solid conductors. Let us note important results regarding
electrostatics of conductors.

1. Inside a conductor, electrostatic ﬁeld is zero

Consider a conductor, neutral or charged. There may also be an external
electrostatic field. In the static situation, when there is no current inside
or on the surface of the conductor, the electric field is zero everywhere
inside the conductor. This fact can be taken as the defining property of a
conductor. A conductor has free electrons. As long as electric field is not
zero, the free charge carriers would experience force and drift. In the
static situation, the free charges have so distributed themselves that the
electric field is zero everywhere inside. Electrostatic field is zero inside a
conductor.

2. At the surface of a charged conductor, electrostatic field
must be normal to the surface at every point

If E were not normal to the surface, it would have some non-zero
component along the surface. Free charges on the surface of the conductor
would then experience force and move. In the static situation, therefore,
E should have no tangential component. Thus electrostatic field at the
surface of a charged conductor must be normal to the surface at every
point. (For a conductor without any surface charge density, field is zero
even at the surface.) See result 5.

3. The interior of a conductor can have no excess charge in
the static situation

A neutral conductor has equal amounts of positive and negative charges
in every small volume or surface element. When the conductor is charged,
the excess charge can reside only on the surface in the static situation.
This follows from the Gauss’s law. Consider any arbitrary volume element
0 inside a conductor. On the closed surface S bounding the volume
element 0, electrostatic field is zero. Thus the total electric ﬂux through S
is zero. Hence, by Gauss’s law, there is no net charge enclosed by S. But
the surface S can be made as small as you like, i.e., the volume U can be
made vanishingly small. This means there is no net charge at any point
inside the conductor, and any excess charge must reside at the surface.

4. Electrostatic potential is constant throughout the volume
of the conductor and has the same value (as inside) on
its surface

This follows from results 1 and 2 above. Since E = 0 inside the conductor
and has no tangential component on the surface, no work is done in
moving a small test charge within the conductor and on its surface. That
is, there is no potential difference between any two points inside or on
the surface of the conductor. Hence, the result. If the conductor is charged,

2019-20