i Physics

Consider a rectangular Amperian loop abcd. Along cd the ﬁeld is zero
as argued above. Along transverse sections bc and ad, the ﬁeld component
is zero. Thus, these two sections make no contribution. Let the ﬁeld along
ab be B. Thus, the relevant length of the Amperian loop is, L = h.

Let n be the number of turns per unit length, then the total number
of turns is nh. The enclosed current is, Ie= I (n h), where I is the current
in the solenoid. From Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4.1 7 (b)]

BL = #018, B h = #01 (n h)
B = #0 n I (4.20)

The direction of the field is given by the right-hand rule. The solenoid
is commonly used to obtain a uniform magnetic ﬁeld. We shall see in the
next chapter that a large ﬁeld is possible by inserting a soft
iron core inside the solenoid.

4.8.2 The toroid

The toroid is a hollow circular ring on which a large number
of turns of a wire are closely wound. It can be viewed as a
solenoid which has been bent into a circular shape to close
on itself. It is shown in Fig. 4. 19(a) carrying a current I. We
shall see that the magnetic ﬁeld in the open space inside
(point P) and exterior to the toroid (point Q) is zero. The
field B inside the toroid is constant in magnitude for the
(a) ideal toroid of closely wound turns.

Figure 4. 19(b) shows a sectional view of the toroid. The
direction of the magnetic ﬁeld inside is clockwise as per the
right-hand thumb rule for circular loops. Three circular
Amperian loops 1, 2 and 3 are shown by dashed lines. By
symmetry, the magnetic ﬁeld should be tangential to each
of them and constant in magnitude for a given loop. The
circular areas bounded by loops 2 and 3 both cut the toroid:
so that each turn of current carrying wire is cut once by
the loop 2 and twice by the loop 3.

Let the magnetic field along loop 1 be B1 in magnitude.
Then in Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4. l7(a)], L = 2?: r1.
However, the loop encloses no current, so 19 = 0. Thus,

(b) B1 (2 TE r1) = 110(0), B1 = 0
FIGURE 4.19 (a) A toroid carrying

a current I. (b) A sectional view of

the toroid The magnetic field can inside the toroid is zero.
be obtained at an arbitrary We shall now show that magnetic ﬁeld at Q is llkCWlSC

distance r from the centre 0 of zero. Let the magnetic ﬁeld along loop 3 be B3. Once again

I

 

 

Thus, the magnetic ﬁeld at any point P in the open space

the toroid by Ampergs drama] from Ampere’s law L = 2 TE r3. However, from the sectional
1am The dashed lines 1a|3e119d cut, we see that the current coming out of the plane of the
1. 2 and 3 are three circular paper is cancelled exactly by the current going into it. Thus,
Ampﬁrian 100PS- 16: O, and B3 = 0. Let the magnetic field inside the solenoid

be B. We shall now consider the magnetic ﬁeld at 8. Once again we employ
Ampere’s law in the form of Eq. [4.17 (a)]. We ﬁnd, L= 21: r.
The current enclosed IQ is (for N turns of toroidal coil) N I.

1 52 B (2m) = #ONI

2019-20