U N [TS AND M EASU REM ENT

23

Table 2.5 Range and order of time intervals

Life-span of most unstable particle

Time interval(s)

Time required for light to cross a nuclear distance

Period of x—rays
Period of atomic vibrations
Period of light wave

Life time of an excited state of an atom

Period of radio wave
Period of a sound wave
Wink of eye

Time between successive human heart beats

Travel time for light from moon to the Earth
Travel time for light from the Sun to the Earth

Time period of a satellite
Rotation period of the Earth

Rotation and revolution periods of the moon

Revolution period of the Earth

Travel time for light from nearest star

Average human life-span

Age of Egyptian pyramids

Time since dinosaurs became extinct
A-e of the universe

-

closer to the true value) but less precision (its
resolution is only 0.1 cm), while the
second measurement is less accurate but
more precise. Thus every measurement is
approximate due to errors in measurement. In
general, the errors in measurement can be
broadly classified as (a) systematic errors and
(b) random errors.

Systematic errors

The systematic errors are those errors that
tend to be in one direction, either positive or
negative. Some of the sources of systematic
errors are :

(a) Instrumental errors that arise from the
errors due to imperfect design or calibration
of the measuring instrument, zero error in
the instrument, etc. For example, the
temperature graduations of a thermometer
may be inadequately calibrated (it may read
104 °C at the boiling point of water at STP
whereas it should read 100 °C); in a vernier
callipers the zero mark of vernier scale may
not coincide with the zero mark of the main
scale, or simply an ordinary metre scale may
be worn off at one end.

(b) Imperfection in experimental technique
or procedure To determine the temperature

 

of a human body, a thermometer placed
under the armpit will always give a
temperature lower than the actual value of
the body temperature. Other external
conditions (such as changes in temperature,
humidity, wind velocity, etc.) during the
experiment may systematically affect the
measurement.

(c) Personal errors that arise due to an
individual’s bias, lack of proper setting of
the apparatus or individual’s carelessness
in taking observations without observing
proper precautions, etc. For example, if you,
by habit, always hold your head a bit too far
to the right while reading the position of a
needle on the scale, you will introduce an
error due to parallax.

Systematic errors can be minimised by
improving experimental techniques, selecting
better instruments and removing personal bias
as far as possible. For a given set-up, these
errors may be estimated to a certain extent and
the necessary corrections may be applied to the
readings.

Random errors

The random errors are those errors, which occur
irregularly and hence are random with respect

2019-20