Moving Charges and

Magnetism

In the next section, we shall use the Biot—Savart law to calculate the

magnetic ﬁeld due to a circular loop.

4.6 MAGNETIC FIELD ON THE AXIS OF A CIRCULAR

CURRENT LOOP

In this section, we shall evaluate the magnetic ﬁeld due to a circular coil
along its axis. The evaluation entails summing up the effect of inﬁnitesimal

current elements (1 dl) mentioned in the previous section.
We assume that the current I is steady and that the
evaluation is carried out in free space (i.e., vacuum).

Figure 4.1 1 depicts a circular loop carrying a steady
current I. The loop is placed in the y-z plane with its
centre at the origin 0 and has a radius R. The x—axis is
the axis of the loop. We wish to calculate the magnetic
ﬁeld at the point P on this axis. Let xbe the distance of
P from the centre 0 of the loop.

Consider a conducting element dl of the loop. This is
shown in Fig. 4.1 1. The magnitude dB of the magnetic
ﬁeld due to dl is given by the Biot-Savart law [Eq. 4. 1 1(a)],

dB 2 & I Idl: r|
471: r

Now r2 = x2 + R2 . Further, any element of the loop
will be perpendicular to the displacement vector from
the element to the axial point. For example, the element
dl in Fig. 4.1 1 is in the y-z plane, whereas, the
displacement vector r from dl to the axial point P is in
the x—y plane. Hence | all X r | =r dl. Thus,

deﬁ Idl

41t(x2+R2) (4.13)

 

(4.12)

 

Z

Y

 

FIGURE 4.11 Magnetic ﬁeld on the
axis of a current carrying circular
loop of radius R. Shown are the
magnetic field dB (due to a line

element dl ) and its
components along and
perpendicular to the axis.

The direction of dB is shown in Fig. 4.1 1. It is perpendicular to the
plane formed by dl and I. It has an x—component de and a component
perpendicular to x—axis, dB 1- When the components perpendicular to
the x—axis are summed over, they cancel out and we obtain a null result.
For example, the dB 1 component due to dl is cancelled by the contribution
due to the diametrically opposite dl element,
Fig. 4.1 1. Thus, only the x—component survives. The net contribution
along x—direction can be obtained by integrating de = dB cos 0 over the

loop. For Fig. 4.1 1,
R
From Eqs. (4.13) and (4.14),

,uIdl R
deZZ —/
1t(x +R)

cos6=

 

2019-20

shown in

(4. 14)

145