CHAPTER FIVE

HOSECHDS

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9

Introduction

Aristotle’s fallacy

The law of inertia

Newton's ﬁrst law of motion

Newton’s second law of
motion

Newton's third law of motion
Conservation of momentum

Equilibrium of a particle

Common forces in mechanics

5. 10 Circular motion

5. 1 1 Solving problems in

mechanics

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises

 

LAWS OF MOTION

,l

 

5. 1 INTRODUCTION

In the preceding Chapter, our concern was to describe the
motion of a particle in space quantitatively. We saw that
uniform motion needs the concept of velocity alone whereas
non-uniform motion requires the concept of acceleration in
addition. So far, we have not asked the question as to what
governs the motion of bodies. In this chapter, we turn to this
basic question.

Let us first guess the answer based on our common
experience. To move a football at rest, someone must kick it.
To throw a stone upwards, one has to give it an upward
push. A breeze causes the branches of a tree to swing; a
strong wind can even move heavy objects. A boat moves in a
ﬂowing river without anyone rowing it. Clearly, some external
agency is needed to provide force to move a body from rest.
Likewise, an external force is needed also to retard or stop
motion. You can stop a ball rolling down an inclined plane by
applying a force against the direction of its motion.

In these examples, the external agency of force (hands,
wind, stream, etc) is in contact with the object. This is not
always necessary. A stone released from the top of a building
accelerates downward due to the gravitational pull of the
earth. A bar magnet can attract an iron nail from a distance.
This shows that external agencies (e.g. gravitational and
magnetic forces) can exert force on a body even from a
distance.

In short, a force is required to put a stationary body in
motion or stop a moving body, and some external agency is
needed to provide this force. The external agency may or may
not be in contact with the body.

So far so good. But what if a body is moving uniformly (e.g.
a skater moving straight with constant speed on a horizontal
ice slab) ? Is an external force required to keep a body in
uniform motion?

2019-20