200

i Physics

 

 

 

EXERCISES

5.1 Answer the following questions regarding earth’s magnetism:

(a)

(b)

(C)

(d)

(f)

A vector needs three quantities for its specification. Name the
three independent quantities conventionally used to specify the
earth’s magnetic field.

The angle of dip at a location in southern India is about 18°.
Would you expect a greater or smaller dip angle in Britain?

If you made a map of magnetic field lines at Melbourne in
Australia, would the lines seem to go into the ground or come out
of the ground?

In which direction would a compass free to move in the vertical
plane point to, if located right on the geomagnetic north or south
pole?

The earth’s field, it is claimed, roughly approximates the field
due to a dipole of magnetic moment 8 X 1022 J T1 located at its
centre. Check the order of magnitude of this number in some
way.

Geologists claim that besides the main magnetic N-S poles, there
are several local poles on the earth’s surface oriented in different
directions. How is such a thing possible at all?

5.2 Answer the following questions:

(a)

(b)

(C)

(d)

(e)

(f)

The earth’s magnetic field varies from point to point in space.
Does it also change with time? If so, on what time scale does it
change appreciably?

The earth’s core is known to contain iron. Yet geologists do not
regard this as a source of the earth’s magnetism. Why?

The charged currents in the outer conducting regions of the
earth’s core are thought to be responsible for earth’s magnetism.
What might be the ‘battery’ (i.e., the source of energy) to sustain
these currents?

The earth may have even reversed the direction of its field several
times during its history of 4 to 5 billion years. How can geologists
know about the earth’s field in such distant past?

The earth’s field departs from its dipole shape substantially at
large distances (greater than about 30,000 km). What agencies
may be responsible for this distortion?

Interstellar space has an extremely weak magnetic field of the
order of 10’12 T. Can such a weak field be of any significant
consequence? Explain.

[Notez Exercise 5.2 is meant mainly to arouse your curiosity.
Answers to some questions above are tentative or unknown. Brief
answers wherever possible are given at the end. For details, you
should consult a good text on geomagnetism.]

5.3 A short bar magnet placed with its axis at 30° with a uniform external
magnetic field of 0.25 T experiences a torque of magnitude equal to
4.5 X 10’2 J. What is the magnitude of magnetic moment of the magnet?

5.4 A short bar magnet of magnetic moment m = 0.32 J T51 is placed in a
uniform magnetic field of 0.15 T. If the bar is free to rotate in the
plane of the field, which orientation would correspond to its (a) stable,
and (b) unstable equilibrium? What is the potential energy of the
magnet in each case?

2019-20