Moving Charges and
Magnetism

ﬁeld vanish (become zero) if velocity and magnetic ﬁeld are parallel
or anti-parallel. The force acts in a (sideways) direction perpendicular

to both the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld.

Its direction is given by the screw rule or

right hand rule for vector (or cross) product

as illustrated in Fig. 4.2.

(iii) The magnetic force is zero if charge is not
moving (as then Iv | = 0). Only a moving
charge feels the magnetic force.

The expression for the magnetic force helps
us to deﬁne the unit of the magnetic ﬁeld, if
one takes q, F and v, all to be unity in the force
equationF= q[v X B] =qusin 0 11, where 9
is the angle between v and B [see Fig. 4.2 (a)].
The magnitude of magnetic field B is 1 SI unit,
when the force acting on a unit charge (1 C),
moving perpendicular to B with a speed 1m/s,
is one newton.

Dimensionally, we have [B] = [F/qv] and the unit

of B are Newton second / (coulomb metre). This

unit is called tesla (T) named after Nikola Tesla

 

 

FIGURE 4.2 The direction of the magnetic
force acting on a charged particle. (at) The
force on a positively charged particle with
velocity v and making an angle 9 with the
magnetic field B is given by the right»hand
rule. (b) A moving charged particle q is
deﬂected in an opposite sense to —q in the
presence of magnetic field.

(1856 — 1943). Tesla is a rather large unit. A smaller unit (non-SI) called
gauss (= 1041 tesla) is also often used. The earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is about
3.6 X 10‘5 T. Table 4.1 lists magnetic ﬁelds over a wide range in the

universe.

TABLE 4. 1 ORDER OF MAGNITUDES OF MAGNETIC FIELDS IN A VARIETY OF PHYSICAL SITUATIONS

Surface of a neutron star

Typical large ﬁeld in a laboratory
Near a small bar magnet

On the earth’s surface

Human nerve ﬁbre

Interstellar space

108

4.2.3 Magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor

We can extend the analysis for force due to magnetic field on a single
moving charge to a straight rod carrying current. Consider a rod of a
uniform cross-sectional area A and length 1. We shall assume one kind
of mobile carriers as in a conductor (here electrons). Let the number
density of these mobile charge carriers in it be n. Then the total number
of mobile charge carriers in it is nlA. For a steady current I in this
conducting rod, we may assume that each mobile carrier has an average 135

2019-20