Duol Nature of Radiation
and Mo’n‘er

 

4. Observations on photoelectric effect imply that in the event of matter—
light interaction, absorption of energy takes place in discrete units of hv.

This is not quite the same as saying that light consists of particles,
each of energy hv.

5. Observations on the stopping potential (its independence of intensity
and dependence on frequency) are the crucial discriminator between
the wave~picture and photon-picture of photoelectric effect.

h
6. The wavelength of a matter wave given by xi = — has physical

P

significance; its phase velocity 1),, has no physical significance. However,
the group velocity of the matter wave is physically meaningful and
equals the velocity of the particle.

EXERCISES

11.1 Find the
(a) maximum frequency, and

(b) minimum wavelength of X-rays produced by 30 kV electrons.

11.2 The work function of caesium metal is 2.14 eV. When light of

frequency 6 X1014Hz is incident on the metal surface, photoemission
of electrons occurs. What is the

(a) maximum kinetic energy of the emitted electrons,
(b) Stopping potential, and
(c) maximum speed of the emitted photoelectrons?

11.3 The photoelectric cut-off voltage in a certain experiment is 1.5 V.
What is the maximum kinetic energr of photoelectrons emitted?

11.4 Monochromatic light of wavelength 632.8 nm is produced by a
helium-neon laser. The power emitted is 9.42 mW.

(a) Find the energy and momentum of each photon in the light beam,

(b) How many photons per second, on the average, arrive at a target
irradiated by this beam? (Assume the beam to have uniform
cross-section which is less than the target area), and

(c) How fast does a hydrogen atom have to travel in order to have
the same momentum as that of the photon?

11.5 The energy ﬂux of sunlight reaching the surface of the earth is
1.388 X 103 W/mz. How many photons (nearly) per square metre are
incident on the Earth per second? Assume that the photons in the
sunlight have an average wavelength of 550 nm.

11.6 In an experiment on photoelectric effect, the slope of the cut-off
voltage versus frequency of incident light is found to be 4.12 X 10’15 V 5.
Calculate the value of Planck’s constant.

11.7 A 100W sodium lamp radiates energy uniformly in all directions.
The lamp is located at the centre of a large sphere that absorbs all
the sodium light which is incident on it. The wavelength of the
sodium light is 589 nm. (a) What is the energy per photon associated 407

2019-20