i Physics

 

them. The path is called a ray of light, and a bundle of such rays

constitutes a beam of light.

In this chapter, we consider the phenomena of reﬂection, refraction
and dispersion of light, using the ray picture of light. Using the basic
laws of reﬂection and refraction, we shall study the image formation by
plane and spherical reﬂecting and refracting surfaces. We then go on to
describe the construction and working of some important optical

instruments, including the human eye.

PARTICLE MODEL OF LIGHT

Newton’s fundamental contributions to mathematics, mechanics, and gravitation often blind
us to his deep experimental and theoretical study of light. He made pioneering contributions
in the ﬁeld of optics. He further developed the corpuscular model of light proposed by
Descartes. It presumes that light energy is concentrated in tiny particles called corpuscles.
He further assumed that corpuscles of light were massless elastic particles. With his
understanding of mechanics, he could come up with a simple model of reﬂection and
refraction. It is a common observation that a ball bouncing from a smooth plane surface
obeys the laws of reﬂection. When this is an elastic collision, the magnitude of the velocity
remains the same. As the surface is smooth, there is no force acting parallel to the surface,
so the component of momentum in this direction also remains the same. Only the component
perpendicular to the surface, i.e., the normal component of the momentum, gets reversed
in reﬂection. Newton argued that smooth surfaces like mirrors reﬂect the corpuscles in a
similar manner.

In order to explain the phenomena of refraction, Newton postulated that the speed of
the corpuscles was greater in water or glass than in air. However, later on it was discovered
that the speed of light is less in water or glass than in air.

In the field of optics, Newton — the experimenter, was greater than Newton — the theorist.
He himself observed many phenomena, which were difficult to understand in terms of
particle nature of light. For example, the colours observed due to a thin ﬁlm of oil on water.
Property of partial reﬂection of light is yet another such example. Everyone who has looked
into the water in a pond sees image of the face in it, but also sees the bottom of the pond.
Newton argued that some of the corpuscles, which fall on the water, get reﬂected and some
get transmitted. But what property could distinguish these two kinds of corpuscles? Newton
had to postulate some kind of unpredictable, chance phenomenon, which decided whether
an individual corpuscle would be reﬂected or not. In explaining other phenomena, however,
the corpuscles were presumed to behave as if they are identical. Such a dilemma does not
occur in the wave picture of light. An incoming wave can be divided into two weaker waves
at the boundary between air and water.

9.2 REFLECTION OF LIGHT BY SPHERICAL MIRRORS

We are familiar with the laws of reﬂection. The angle of reﬂection (i.e., the

angle between reﬂected ray and the normal to the reﬂecting surface or

the mirror) equals the angle of incidence (angle between incident ray and
the normal). Also that the incident ray, reﬂected ray and the normal to
the reﬂecting surface at the point of incidence lie in the same plane
(Fig. 9.1). These laws are valid at each point on any reﬂecting surface

whether plane or curved. However, we shall restrict our discussion to the

3 1 0 special case of curved surfaces, that is, spherical surfaces. The normal in

2019-20