Moving Charges and
Magnetism

This is larger than the value 2X10’7 Nm’1 quoted in the definition
of the ampere. Hence it is important to eliminate the effect Of the
earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and other stray fields while standardising
the ampere.

The direction of the force is downwards. This direction may be {‘1
obtained by the directional property of cross product of vectors. E

(b) When the current is ﬂowing from south to north, r-
9 = 0° :

f = 0 L-

0

Hence there is no force on the conductor.

4. 10 TORQUE ON CURRENT LOOP, MAGNETIC DIPOLE

4. 10. 1 Torque on a rectangular current loop in a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld

We now show that a rectangular loop carrying a steady current I and
placed in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld experiences a torque. It does not
experience a net force. This behaviour is analogous to

that Of electric dipole in a uniform electric field 6 R a . 3.
otat10nax1s

(Section 1.12).

We first consider the simple case when the
rectangular loop is placed such that the uniform
magnetic field B is in the plane of the loop. This is
illustrated in Fig. 4.2 1(a).

The field exerts no force on the two arms AD and BC
Of the loop. It is perpendicular to the arm AB Of the loop
and exerts a force F1 on it which is directed into the
plane Of the loop. Its magnitude is,

F1 = I b B
Similarly, it exerts a force F2 on the arm CD and F2
is directed out Of the plane Of the paper.

 

F2 = I b B = F1 F,
Thus, the net force on the loop is zero. There is a
torque on the loop due to the pair of forces F1 and F2. a/2 a/2
Figure 4.2l(b) shows a View Of the loop from the AD (— _><_
end. It shows that the torque on the loop tends to rotate
it anticlockwise. This torque is (in magnitude), m
a a F1
= F — F —
T 1 2 + 2 2 (b)
a a FIGURE 4.21 (a) A rectangular
= H935 + H3135 = I(ab)B current~carrying coil in uniform

magnetic field. The magnetic moment
= IA B (4'26) m points downwards. The torque 1: is

whereA= ab is the area of the rectangle. along the axis and tends to rotate the
coil anticlockwise. (b) The couple

We next consider the case when the plane Of the loop, acting on the coil

is not along the magnetic ﬁeld, but makes an angle with 1 57
it. We take the angle between the ﬁeld and the normal to

2019-20