LAWS OF MOTION

93

 

The property of inertia contained in the First
law is evident in many situations. Suppose we
are standing in a stationary bus and the driver
starts the bus suddenly. We get thrown
backward with a jerk. Why ? Our feet are in touch
with the ﬂoor. If there were no friction, we would
remain where we were, while the ﬂoor of the bus
would simply slip forward under our feet and the
back of the bus would hit us. However,
fortunately, there is some friction between the
feet and the ﬂoor. If the start is not too sudden,
i.e. if the acceleration is moderate, the frictional
force would be enough to accelerate our feet
along with the bus. But our body is not strictly
a rigid body. It is deformable, i.e. it allows some
relative displacement between different parts.
What this means is that while our feet go with
the bus, the rest of the body remains where it is
due to inertia. Relative to the bus, therefore, we
are thrown backward. As soon as that happens,
however, the muscular forces on the rest of the
body (by the feet) come into play to move the body
along with the bus. A similar thing happens
when the bus suddenly stops. Our feet stop due
to the friction which does not allow relative
motion between the feet and the ﬂoor of the bus.
But the rest of the body continues to move
forward due to inertia. We are thrown forward.
The restoring muscular forces again come into
play and bring the body to rest.

 

’ Example 5.1 An astronaut accidentally
gets separated out of his small spaceship
accelerating in inter stellar space at a
constant rate of 100 m 5’2. What is the
acceleration of the astronaut the instant after

he is outside the spaceship ? (Assume that
there are no nearby stars to exert
gravitational force on him.)

 

Answer Since there are no nearby stars to exert
gravitational force on him and the small
spaceship exerts negligible gravitational
attraction on him, the net force acting on the
astronaut, once he is out of the spaceship, is
zero. By the first law of motion the acceleration
of the astronaut is zero. 4

5.5 NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION

The first law refers to the simple case when the
net external force on a body is zero. The second
law of motion refers to the general situation when
there is a net external force acting on the body.

It relates the net external force to the
acceleration of the body.

Momentum
Momentum of a body is deﬁned to be the product
of its mass m and velocity v, and is denoted
by p:

p = mv (5.1)

Momentum is clearly a vector quantity. The
following common experiences indicate the
importance of this quantity for considering the
effect of force on motion.

0 Suppose a light-weight vehicle (say a small
car) and a heavy weight vehicle (say a loaded
truck) are parked on a horizontal road. We all
know that a much greater force is needed to
push the truck than the car to bring them to
the same speed in same time. Similarly, a
greater opposing force is needed to stop a
heavy body than a light body in the same time,
if they are moving with the same speed.

0 If two stones, one light and the other heavy,

are dropped from the top of a building, a
person on the gound will find it easier to catch
the light stone than the heavy stone. The
mass of a body is thus an important
parameter that determines the effect of force
on its motion.

' Speed is another important parameter to
consider. A bullet ﬁred by a gun can easily
pierce human tissue before it stops, resulting
in casualty. The same bullet fired with
moderate speed will not cause much damage.
Thus for a given mass, the greater the speed,
the greater is the opposing force needed to stop
the body in a certain time. Taken together,
the product of mass and velocity, that is
momentum, is evidently a relevant variable
of motion. The greater the change in the
momentum in a given time, the greater is the
force that needs to be applied.

' A seasoned cricketer catches a cricket ball
coming in with great speed far more easily
than a novice, who can hurt his hands in the
act. One reason is that the cricketer allows a
longer time for his hands to stop the ball. As
you may have noticed, he draws in the hands
backward in the act of catching the ball (Fig.
5.3). The novice, on the other hand, keeps
his hands fixed and tries to catch the ball
almost instantly. He needs to provide a much
greater force to stop the ball instantly, and

2019-20