l Physics

 

T

Stopping
potential
(Vol

Metal A

Frequency of incident radiation (v)—>

 

Fig. 1 1.4 that the stopping potentials are in the
order V03 > V02 > V01 if the frequencies are in the
order v3 > v2 > v1 . This implies that greater the
frequency of incident light, greater is the
maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons.
Consequently, we need greater retarding
potential to stop them completely. If we plot a
graph between the frequency of incident radiation
and the corresponding stopping potential for
different metals we get a straight line, as shown
in Fig. 1 1.5.

  
 

FIGURE 11.5 Variation of stopping potential V0 Th6 graph ShOWS that
with frequency v of incident radiation for a (i) the stopping potential V0 varies linearlywith

392

given photosensitive material. the frequency of incident radiation for a given

photosensitive material.

(ii) there exists a certain minimum cut-off frequency v0 for which the
stopping potential is zero.

These observations have two implications:

(i) The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons varies linearly
with the frequency of incident radiation, but is independent of its
intensity.

(ii) For a frequency v of incident radiation, lower than the cut-off

frequency v0, no photoelectric emission is possible even if the

intensity is large.

This minimum, cut-off frequency v0, is called the threshold frequency.
It is different for different metals.

Different photosensitive materials respond diiferently to light. Selenium
is more sensitive than zinc or copper. The same photosensitive substance
gives different response to light of different wavelengths. For example,
ultraviolet light gives rise to photoelectric effect in copper while green or
red light does not.

Note that in all the above experiments, it is found that, if frequency of
the incident radiation exceeds the threshold frequency, the photoelectric
emission starts instantaneously without any apparent time lag, even if
the incident radiation is very dim. It is now known that emission starts in
a time of the order of 10‘9 s or less.

We now summarise the experimental features and observations
described in this section.

(i) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation
(above the threshold frequency), the photoelectric current is directly
proportional to the intensity of incident light (Fig. 1 1.2).

(ii) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation,
saturation current is found to be proportional to the intensity of
incident radiation whereas the stopping potential is independent of
its intensity (Fig. 1 1.3).

(iii) For a given photosensitive material, there exists a certain minimum
cut-off frequency of the incident radiation, called the threshold

frequency, below which no emission of photoelectrons takes place,
no matter how intense the incident light is. Above the threshold
frequency, the stopping potential or equivalently the maximum kinetic

2019-20