LAWS OF MOTION

 

The total momentum of an isolated system
of interacting particles is conserved.

An important example of the application of the
law of conservation of momentum is the collision
of two bodies. Consider two bodies A and B, with
initial momenta p A and p3. The bodies collide,
get apart, with final momenta p’A and p’B
respectively. By the Second Law

FABAt 2 PA — PA and

FBAAt = P’B — PB
(where we have taken a common interval of time

for both forces i.e. the time for which the two
bodies are in contact.)

Since F AB = —FBA by the third law,
p’A — pA = -(pia — p3)

Le. P’A + P’B 2 PA + PB (5'9)
which shows that the total final momentum of
the isolated system equals its initial momentum.
Notice that this is true whether the collision is
elastic or inelastic. In elastic collisions, there is
a second condition that the total initial kinetic

energy of the system equals the total final kinetic
energy (See Chapter 6).

5.8 EQUILIBRIUM OF A PARTICLE

Equilibrium of a particle in mechanics refers to
the situation when the net external force on the
particle is zero’." According to the first law, this
means that, the particle is either at rest or in
uniform motion.

If two forces F1 and F2, act on a particle,
equilibrium requires

F1 = _F2 (5.10)

i.e. the two forces on the particle must be equal

and opposite. Equilibrium under three
concurrent forces F1, F2 and F3 requires that
the vector sum of the three forces is zero.

F1+F2 +F3 = o (5.11)

* Equilibrium of a body requires not only translational equilibrium (zero net external force) but also rotational

99

 

Fig. 5. 7 Equilibrium under concurrent forces.

In other words, the resultant of any two forces
say F1 and F2, obtained by the parallelogram
law of forces must be equal and opposite to the
third force, F3. As seen in Fig. 5.7, the three
forces in equilibrium can be represented by the
sides of a triangle with the vector arrows taken
in the same sense. The result can be
generalised to any number of forces. A particle
is in equilibrium under the action of forces F1,
F2, Fn if they can be represented by the sides
of a closed n-sided polygon with arrows directed
in the same sense.

Equation (5.1 1) implies that

F1x + F2x+ F3x = 0

Fly + FZy + Fsy = 0

F12 +FZZ+F3Z=O (5.12)

where FIX, Fly and F12 are the components of F1
along x, y and 2 directions respectively.

 

> Example 5.6 See Fig. 5.8. A mass 0f6 kg
is suspended by a rope of length 2 m
from the ceiling. A force of 50 N in the
horizontal direction is applied at the mid
point P of the rope. as shown. What is the
angle the rope makes with the vertical in
equilibrium ? (Take g = 10 m s2). Neglect
the mass of the rope.

 

   

60N

(a) (b) (C)
Fig. 5.8

equilibrium (zero net external torque), as we shall see in Chapter 7.

2019-20