MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

Example 1 0.7Blood velocity: The ﬂow of
blood in a large artery of an anesthetised
dog is diverted through a Venturi meter.
The wider part of the meter has a cross-
sectional area equal to that of the artery.

A = 8 mm2. The narrower part has an area
a = 4 mmz. The pressure drop in the artery
is 24 Pa. What is the speed of the blood in
the artery?

Answer We take the density of blood from Table
10.1 to be 1.06 x 103 kg m‘3. The ratio of the

A
areas is (a) = 2. Using Eq. (10.17) we obtain

v = & =0 123ms'1
1 1060kg m-3x(22— 1) '

10.4.3 Blood Flow and Heart Attack
Bernoulli’s principle helps in explaining blood
ﬂow in artery. The artery may get constricted
due to the accumulation of plaque on its inner
walls. In order to drive the blood through this
constriction a greater demand is placed on the
activity of the heart. The speed of the ﬂow of
the blood in this region is raised which lowers
the pressure inside and the artery may
collapse due to the external pressure. The
heart exerts further pressure to open this
artery and forces the blood through. As the
blood rushes through the opening, the
internal pressure once again drops clue to
same reasons leading to a repeat collapse.
This may result in heart attack.

l)

[a]

 

10.4.4 Dynamic Lift

Dynamic lift is the force that acts on a body,
such as airplane wing, a hydrofoil or a spinning
ball, by virtue of its motion through a ﬂuid. In
many games such as cricket, tennis, baseball,
or golf, we notice that a spinning ball deviates
from its parabolic trajectory as it moves through
air. This deviation can be partly explained on
the basis of Bernoulli’s principle.

(i) Ball moving without spin: Fig. 10.13(a)
shows the streamlines around a
non-spinning ball moving relative to a ﬂuid.
From the symmetry of streamlines it is clear
that the velocity of ﬂuid (air) above and below
the ball at corresponding points is the same
resulting in zero pressure difference. The air
therefore, exerts no upward or downward
force on the ball.

(ii) Ball moving with spin: A ball which is
spinning drags air along with it. If the
surface is rough more air will be dragged.
Fig 10.13(b) shows the streamlines of air
for a ball which is moving and spinning at
the same time. The ball is moving forward
and relative to it the air is moving
backwards. Therefore, the velocity of air
above the ball relative to the ball is larger
and below it is smaller (see Section 10.3).
The stream lines, thus, get crowded above
and rarified below.

This difference in the velocities of air results
in the pressure difference between the lower and
upper faces and there is a net upward force on
the ball. This dynamic lift clue to spining is called
Magnus effect.

 

Fig 1 O. 1 3 (a) Fluid streaming past a static sphere. (b) Streamlines for a ﬂuid around a sphere spinning clockwise.

(0) Air ﬂowing past an aerofoil.

2019-20