184

i Physics

‘9.
m
g
If]

 

(b)

(C)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

 

Wrong. Magnetic field lines (like electric field lines) can never cross
each other, because otherwise the direction of ﬁeld at the point of
intersection is ambiguous. There is further error in the figure.
Magnetostatic ﬁeld lines can never form closed loops around empty
space. A closed loop of static magnetic field line must enclose a
region across which a current is passing. By contrast, electrostatic
field lines can never form closed loops, neither in empty space,
nor when the loop encloses charges.

Right. Magnetic lines are completely confined within a toroid.
Nothing wrong here in field lines forming closed loops, since each
loop encloses a region across which a current passes. Note, for
clarity of figure, only a few field lines within the toroid have been
shown. Actually, the entire region enclosed by the windings
contains magnetic field.

Wrong. Field lines due to a solenoid at its ends and outside cannot
be so completely straight and confined; such a thing violates
Ampere’s law. The lines should curve out at both ends, and meet
eventually to form closed loops.

Right. These are field lines outside and inside a bar magnet. Note
carefully the direction of ﬁeld lines inside. Not all field lines emanate
out of a north pole (or converge into a south pole). Around both
the N-pole, and the S-pole, the net ﬂux of the ﬁeld is zero.

Wrong. These field lines cannot possibly represent a magnetic ﬁeld.
Look at the upper region. All the ﬁeld lines seem to emanate out of
the shaded plate. The net ﬂux through a surface surrounding the
shaded plate is not zero. This is impossible for a magnetic ﬁeld.
The given field lines, in fact, show the electrostatic field lines
around a positively charged upper plate and a negatively charged
lower plate. The difference between Fig. [5.7 (e) and (f)] should be
carefully grasped.

Wrong. Magnetic ﬁeld lines between two pole pieces cannot be
precisely straight at the ends. Some fringing of lines is inevitable.
Otherwise, Ampere’s law is violated. This is also true for electric
field lines.

Example 5.7

(a)

(b)

(C)
(d)

(e)

Magnetic ﬁeld lines show the direction (at every point) along which
a small magnetised needle aligns (at the point). Do the magnetic
ﬁeld lines also represent the lines of force on a moving charged
particle at every point?

Magnetic ﬁeld lines can be entirely confined within the core of a
toroid, but not within a straight solenoid. Why?

If magnetic monopoles existed, how would the Gauss’s law of
magnetism be modiﬁed?

Does a bar magnet exert a torque on itself due to its own field?
Does one element of a current-carrying wire exert a force on another
element of the same wire?

Magnetic field arises due to charges in motion. Can a system have
magnetic moments even though its net charge is zero?

Solution

(a)

No. The magnetic force is always normal to B (remember magnetic
force = qv X B). It is misleading to call magnetic ﬁeld lines as lines

of force.

2019-20