i Physics

 

with the normal of the coil. Calculate the magnitude of the
counter torque that must be applied to prevent the coil from
turning.

(b) Would your answer change, if the circular coil in (a) were replaced
by a planar coil of some irregular shape that encloses the same
area? (All other particulars are also unaltered.)

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

4.14 Two concentric circular coils X and Y of radii 16 cm and 10 cm,
respectively, lie in the same vertical plane containing the north to
south direction. Coil X has 20 turns and carries a current of 16 A;
coil Y has 25 turns and carries a current of 18 A. The sense of the
current in X is anticlockwise, and clockwise in Y, for an observer
looking at the coils facing west. Give the magnitude and direction of
the net magnetic field due to the coils at their centre.

4.15 A magnetic field of 100 G (1 G = 10’4 T) is required which is uniform
in a region of linear dimension about 10 cm and area of cross-section
about 10’3 mg. The maximum current-carrying capacity of a given
coil of wire is 15 A and the number of turns per unit length that can
be wound round a core is at most 1000 turns m’l. Suggest some
appropriate design particulars of a solenoid for the required purpose.
Assume the core is not ferromagnetic.

4.16 For a circular coil of radius R and N turns carrying current I, the
magnitude of the magnetic field at a point on its axis at a distance x
from its centre is given by,

,uOIR2N

_ 2(x2 +R2)3/2

(a) Show that this reduces to the familiar result for field at the
centre of the coil.

(b) Consider two parallel co-axial circular coils of equal radius R,
and number of turns N, carrying equal currents in the same
direction, and separated by a distance R. Show that the field on
the axis around the mid-point between the coils is uniform over
a distance that is small as compared to R, and is given by,

NI
B = 0.72%? , approximately.

[Such an arrangement to produce a nearly uniform magnetic
field over a small region is known as Helmholtz 00115.]

4.17 A toroid has a core (non-ferromagnetic) of inner radius 25 cm and
outer radius 26 cm, around which 3500 turns of a wire are wound.
If the current in the wire is 11 A, what is the magnetic field
(a) outside the toroid, (b) inside the core of the toroid, and (c) in the
empty space surrounded by the toroid.

4.18 Answer the following questions:

(a) A magnetic field that varies in magnitude from point to point
but has a constant direction (east to west) is set up in a chamber.
A charged particle enters the chamber and travels undeﬂected

170

2019-20