MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 2 71
—

10.

11.

Bernoulli’s principle states that as we move along a streamline, the sum of the
pressure (P), the kinetic energy per unit volume (p v2 / 2) and the potential energy per
unit volume (pgy) remains a constant.

P+ pu2/2 + pgy = constant

The equation is basically the conservation of energy applied to non viscuss ﬂuid
motion in steady state. There is no ﬂuid which have zero viscosity, so the above
statement is true only approximately. The viscosity is like friction and converts the
kinetic energy to heat energy.

Though shear strain in a ﬂuid does not require shear stress, when a shear stress is
applied to a ﬂuid, the motion is generated which causes a shear strain growing
with time. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known
as coefﬁcient of viscosity, 1}

where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text.

Stokes’ law states that the viscous drag force F on a sphere of radius a moving with
velocity v through a ﬂuid of viscosity is, F = — 6mav.

Surface tension is a force per unit length [or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of interface between the liquid and the bounding surface. It is the extra
energy that the molecules at the interface have as compared to the interior.

POINTS TO PONDER

1.

Pressure is a scalar quantity. The definition of the pressure as “force per unit area" may
give one false impression that pressure is a vector. The “force" in the numerator of the
definition is the component of the force normal to the area upon which it is impressed.

While describing ﬂuids as a concept. shift from particle and rigid body mechanics is
required. We are concerned with properties that vary from point to point in the ﬂuid.
One should not think of pressure of a ﬂuid as being exerted only on a solid like the

walls of a container or a piece of solid matter immersed in the ﬂuid. Pressure exists at
all points in a ﬂuid. An element of a ﬂuid {such as the one shown in Fig. 10.2] is in
equilibrium because the pressures exerted on the various faces are equal.

The expression for pressure

P= Pu+ p gh

holds true if ﬂuid is incompressible. Practically speaking it holds for liquids. which
are largely incompressible and hence is a constant with height.

The gauge pressure is the difference of the actual pressure and the atmospheric pressure.
P— P = P

Many pressure—measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre
pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer).

A streamline is a map of ﬂuid ﬂow. In a steady ﬂow two streamlines do not intersect as
it means that the ﬂuid particle will have two possible velocities at the point.
Bernoulli’s principle does not hold in presence of viscous drag on the ﬂuid. The work
done by this dissipative viscous force must be taken into account in this case. and P2
[Fig 10.9] will be lower than the value given by Eq. (10.12).

As the temperature rises the atoms of the liquid become more mobile and the coefficient
of viscosity. 1] falls. In a gas the temperature rise increases the random motion of
atoms and nincreases.

Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface
in comparison to their potential energy in the interior. Such a surface energy is present
at the interface separating two substances at least one of which is a ﬂuid. It is not the
property of a single ﬂuid alone.

 

2019-20