I Physics

 

7. A changing current in a coil (coil 2) can induce an emf in a nearby coil

[coil 1). This relation is given by,
g

12 dt
The quantity M12 is called mutual inductance of coil 1 with respect to
coil 2. One can similarly deﬁne M21. There exists a general equality,
M12 = M21

8. When a current in a coil changes, it induces a back emf in the same
coil. The self-induced emf is given by,

81 =—M

L is the self-inductance of the coil. It is a measure of the inertia of the
coil against the change of current through it.

9. The self-inductance of a long solenoid, the core of which consists of a
magnetic material of permeability Mr. is given by

L= ,ur [Jon2Al

where A is the area of cross-section of the solenoid, lits length and n
the number of tums per unit length.

10. In an ac generator, mechanical energy is converted to electrical energy
by virtue of electromagnetic induction. If coil of N turn and area A is
rotated at v revolutions per second in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B, then
the motional emf produced is

s = NBA (21w) sin (27: vt)

where we‘ have assumed that at time t = 0 s. the coil is perpendicular to
the ﬁeld.

 

Quantity ' Dimensions Equations

[M L2 T—2 A'l]
[M L2 T* A'l]
[M L2 T'2 A'Z]

[M L2 T‘2 A'Z]

   

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Electricity and magnetism are intimately related. In the early part of the
nineteenth century. the experiments of Oersted. Ampere and others
established that moving charges (currents) produce a magnetic ﬁeld.
Somewhat later, around 1830. the experiments of Faraday and Henry
demonstrated that a moving magnet can induce electric current.

2. In a closed circuit. electric currents are induced so as to oppose the
changing magnetic ﬂux. It is as per the law of conservation of energy.
However, in case of an open circuit. an emf is induced across its ends.
How is it related to the ﬂux change?

3. The motional emf discussed in Section 6.5 can be argued independently

228 from Faraday’s law using the Lorentz force on moving charges. However.

2019-20