4 2

PHYSICS

 

Now, let us consider the motion of a car that
starts from rest at time t= O s from the origin 0
and picks up speed till t = 10 s and thereafter
moves with uniform speed till t = 18 s. Then the
brakes are applied and the car stops at
t= 20 s and x= 296 m. The position-time graph
for this case is shown in Fig. 3.3. We shall refer
to this graph in our discussion in the following
sections.

3.3 AVERAGE VELOCITY AND AVERAGE
SPEED

When an object is in motion, its position
changes with time. But how fast is the position
changing with time and in what direction? To
describe this, we define the quantity average
velocity. Average velocity is defined as the
change in position or displacement (Ax) divided
by the time intervals (At), in which the
displacement occurs :

x2 — x1 Ax (31)

l): :—

tZ—tl At

 

where x2 and x1 are the positions of the object
at time t2and t1, respectively. Here the bar over
the symbol for velocity is a standard notation
used to indicate an average quantity. The SI
unit for velocity is m / s or In 8—1, although km h‘1
is used in many everyday applications.

Like displacement, average velocity is also a
vector quantity. But as explained earlier, for
motion in a straight line, the directional aspect
of the vector can be taken care of by + and —
signs and we do not have to use the vector
notation for velocity in this chapter.

 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
t (s) —+
Fig. 3.4 The average velocity is the slope of line P1P2'

2019-20

Consider the motion of the car in Fig. 3.3. The
portion of the x—t graph between t= O s and t= 8
s is blown up and shown in Fig. 3.4. As seen
from the plot, the average velocity of the car
betweentime t= 5 s and t= 7 sis:
x2 —x1 (27.4 — 10.0)m

t2 — t1 (7 — 5) s
Geometrically, this is the slope of the straight
line P1P2 connecting the initial position P1 to
the final position P2 as shown in Fig. 3.4.

The average velocity can be positive or negative
depending upon the sign of the displacement. It
is zero if the displacement is zero. Fig. 3.5 shows
the x—t graphs for an obj ect, moving with positive
velocity (Fig. 3.5a), moving with negative velocity
(Fig. 3.5b) and at rest (Fig. 3.5c).

1| 1| T
X X
0 0 t_, o _,

t—>
(a) (b) (C)
Fig. 3.5 Position—time graph for an object (a) moving
with positive velocity, (b) moving with
negative velocity, and (c) at rest.

1

B: =a7ms‘

 

Average velocity as defined above involves
only the displacement of the object. We have seen
earlier that the magnitude of displacement may
be different from the actual path length. To
describe the rate of motion over the actual path,
we introduce another quantity called average
speed.

Average speed is defined as the total path
length travelled divided by the total time
interval during which the motion has taken
place :

Total path length
Average speed 2 — (32)

Total time interval
Average speed has obviously the same unit
(m s4) as that of velocity. But it does not tell us
in what direction an object is moving. Thus, it
is always positive (in contrast to the average
velocity which can be positive or negative). If the
motion of an object is along a straight line and
in the same direction, the magnitude of
displacement is equal to the total path length.
In that case, the magnitude of average velocity