340

 

 

l Physics

 

Let us consider a pair of stars of actual separation 1’ (one minute of
arc). The stars appear as though they are separated by an angle of 100 X
1’ = 100’ =1.67°.

_ _ _ . . k— —>
. _ Objectlve f0 I Eyepiece

    

FIGURE 9.29 A refracting telescope.

The main considerations with an astronomical telescope are its light
gathering power and its resolution or resolving power. The former clearly
depends on the area of the objective. With larger diameters, fainter objects
can be observed. The resolving power, or the ability to observe two objects
distinctly, which are in very nearly the same direction, also depends on
the diameter of the objective. So, the desirable aim in optical telescopes is
to make them with objective of large diameter. The largest lens objective
in use has a diameter of 40 inch (~ 1.02 m). It is at the Yerkes Observatory
in Wisconsin, USA. Such big lenses tend to be very heavy and therefore,
difficult to make and support by their edges. Further, it is rather difficult
and expensive to make such large sized lenses which form images that
are free from any kind of chromatic aberration and distortions.

For these reasons, modern telescopes use a concave mirror rather
than a lens for the objective. Telescopes with mirror objectives are called
reﬂecting telescopes. There is no chromatic aberration in a mirror.
Mechanical support is much less of a problem since a mirror weighs
much less than a lens of equivalent optical quality, and can be supported
over its entire back surface, not just over its rim. One obvious problem
with a reﬂecting telescope is that the objective mirror focusses light inside
the telescope tube. One must have an eyepiece and the observer right
there, obstructing some light (depending on the size of the observer cage).
This is what is done in the very large 200 inch (~5.08 m) diameters, Mt.
Palomar telescope, California. The viewer sits near the focal point of the
mirror, in a small cage. Another solution to the problem is to deﬂect the
light being focussed by another mirror. One such arrangement using a

2019-20