i Physics

(iii) The larger the number of ﬁeld lines crossing per unit area, the stronger
is the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld B. In Fig. 5.3(a), B is larger
around region ® than in region@.

(iv) The magnetic ﬁeld lines do not intersect, for if they did, the direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld would not be unique at the point of intersection.
One can plot the magnetic field lines in a variety of ways. One way is

to place a small magnetic compass needle at various positions and note

its orientation. This gives us an idea of the magnetic ﬁeld direction at
various points in space.

5.2.2 Bar magnet as an equivalent solenoid

In the previous chapter, we have explained how a current loop acts as a
magnetic dipole (Section 4.10). We mentioned Ampere’s hypothesis that
all magnetic phenomena can be explained in terms of circulating currents.

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 5.4 Calculation of (a) The axial field of a
finite solenoid in order to demonstrate its similarity
to that of a bar magnet. (b) A magnetic needle
in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B. The
arrangement may be used to
determine either B or the magnetic
moment In of the needle.

Recall that the magnetic dipole moment m
associated with a current loop was deﬁned
to be m = N1 A where N is the number of
turns in the loop, I the current and A the
area vector (Eq. 4.30).

The resemblance of magnetic ﬁeld lines

for a bar magnet and a solenoid suggest that
a bar magnet may be thought of as a large
number of circulating currents in analogy
with a solenoid. Cutting a bar magnet in half
is like cutting a solenoid. We get two smaller
solenoids with weaker magnetic properties.
The ﬁeld lines remain continuous, emerging
from one face of the solenoid and entering
into the other face. One can test this analogy
by moving a small compass needle in the
neighbourhood of a bar magnet and a
current-carrying ﬁnite solenoid and noting
that the deﬂections of the needle are similar
in both cases.
To make this analogy more firm we
calculate the axial ﬁeld of a ﬁnite solenoid
depicted in Fig. 5.4 (a). We shall demonstrate
that at large distances this axial field
resembles that of a bar magnet.

Let the solenoid of Fig. 5.4(a) consists of
n turns per unit length. Let its length be 21
and radius a. We can evaluate the axial ﬁeld
at a point P, at a distance r from the centre 0

of the solenoid. To do this, consider a circular element of thickness dxof
the solenoid at a distance xfrom its centre. It consists of n dxturns. Let I
be the current in the solenoid. In Section 4.6 of the previous chapter we
have calculated the magnetic ﬁeld on the axis of a circular current loop.
From Eq. (4.13), the magnitude of the ﬁeld at point P due to the circular

1 76 element is

2019-20