OSCILLATIONS

359

 

swings is a good example of resonance. You
might have realised that the skill in swinging to
greater heights lies in the synchronisation of
the rhythm of pushing against the ground with
the natural frequency of the swing.

To illustrate this point further, let us
consider a set of five simple pendulums of
assorted lengths suspended from a common rope
as shown in Fig. 14.22. The pendulums 1 and 4
have the same lengths and the others have
different lengths. Now, let us set pendulum 1
into motion. The energy from this pendulum gets
transferred to other pendulums through the
connecting rope and they start oscillating. The
driving force is provided through the connecting
rope. The frequency of this force is the frequency
with which pendulum 1 oscillates. If we observe
the response of pendulums 2, 3 and 5, they first
start oscillating with their natural frequencies
of oscillations and different amplitudes, but this

 

5
Fig. 14.22 Five simple pendulums of different
lengths suspended from a common
support.

motion is gradually damped and not sustained.
Their frequencies of oscillation gradually
change, and ultimately, they oscillate with the
frequency of pendulum 1, i.e., the frequency of
the driving force but with different amplitudes.
They oscillate with small amplitudes. The
response of pendulum 4 is in contrast to this
set of pendulums. It oscillates with the same
frequency as that of pendulum 1 and its
amplitude gradually picks up and becomes very
large. A resonance-like response is seen.
This happens because in this the condition for
resonance is satisfied, i.e. the natural frequency
of the system coincides with that of the
driving force.

We have so far considered oscillating systems
which have just one natural frequency. In
general, a system may have several natural
frequencies. You will see examples of such
systems (vibrating strings, air columns, etc.) in
the next chapter. Any mechanical structure, like
a building, a bridge, or an aircraft may have
several possible natural frequencies. An
external periodic force or disturbance will set
the system in forced oscillation. If, accidentally,
the forced frequency cod happens to be close to
one of the natural frequencies of the system,
the amplitude of oscillation will shoot up
(resonance), resulting in possible damage. This
is why, soldiers go out of step while crossing a
bridge. For the same reason, an earthquake will
not cause uniform damage to all buildings in
an affected area, even if they are built with the
same strength and material. The natural
frequencies of a building depend on its height,
other size parameters, and the nature of
building material. The one with its natural
frequency close to the frequency of seismic wave
is likely to be damaged more.

SUMMARY

1. The motion that repeats itself is called periodic motion.

2. The period Tis the time required for one complete oscillation, or cycle. It is related to

the frequency v by,

T21
V

2019-20