l84

PHYSICS

Copernicus (1473-1543) proposed a deﬁnitive
model in which the planets moved in circles
around a fixed central sun. His theory was
discredited by the church, but notable amongst
its supporters was Galileo who had to face
prosecution from the state for his beliefs.

It was around the same time as Galileo, a
nobleman called Tycho Brahe (1546-1601)
hailing from Denmark, spent his entire lifetime
recording observations of the planets with the
naked eye. His compiled data were analysed
later by his assistant Johannes Kepler (157 l-
1640). He could extract from the data three
elegant laws that now go by the name of Kepler’s
laws. These laws were known to Newton and
enabled him to make a great scientific leap in
proposing his universal law of gravitation.

8.2 KEPLER'S LAWS

The three laws of Kepler can be stated as follows:
1. Law of orbits : All planets move in elliptical
orbits with the Sun situated at one of the foci

 

Fig. 8.1(a) An ellipse traced out by a planet around
the sun. The closest point is P and the
farthest point is A, P is called the
perihelion and A the aphelion. The
semimajor axis is half the distance AP.

 

Fig. 8.1(b) Drawing an ellipse. A string has its ends
ﬁxed at F1 and F2. The tip of a pencil holds
the string taut and is moved around.

* Refer to information given in the Box on Page 182

2019-20

of the ellipse (Fig. 8.1a). This law was a deviation
from the Copernican model which allowed only
circular orbits. The ellipse, of which the circle is
a special case, is a closed curve which can be
drawn very simply as follows.

Select two points F1 and F2. Take a length

of a string and fix its ends at F1 and F2 by pins.
With the tip of a pencil stretch the string taut
and then draw a curve by moving the pencil
keeping the string taut throughout.(Fig. 8.1(b))
The closed curve you get is called an ellipse.
Clearly for any point T on the ellipse, the sum of
the distances from F1 and F2 is a constant. F1,
F2 are called the focii. Join the points F1 and F2
and extend the line to intersect the ellipse at
points P and A as shown in Fig. 8.1(b). The
midpoint of the line PA is the centre of the ellipse
O and the length P0 = A0 is called the semi-
major axis of the ellipse. For a circle, the two
focii merge into one and the semi-major axis
becomes the radius of the circle.
2. Law of areas : The line that joins any planet
to the sun sweeps equal areas in equal intervals
of time (Fig. 8.2). This law comes from the
observations that planets appear to move slower
when they are farther from the sun than when
they are nearer.

   

p (Planet)

Fig. 8.2 The planet P moves around the sun in an
elliptical orbit. The shaded area is the area
AA swept out in a small interval of time At.

3. Law of periods : The square of the time period
of revolution of a planet is proportional to the
cube of the semi-major axis of the ellipse traced
out by the planet.

Table 8.1 gives the approximate time periods
of revolution of eight* planets around the sun
along with values of their semi-major axes.