120

PIIYSICS

not available explicitly. Another observation is that
Newton’s second law for two or three dimensions
is in vector form whereas the work-energy
theorem is in scalar form. In the scalar form,
information with respect to directions contained
in Newton’s second law is not present.

 

b Example 6.6 A block of mass m = 1 kg,
moving on a horizontal surface with speed
v1. = 2 In S‘1 enters a rough patch ranging
from x= 0.10 m to x= 2.01 m. The retarding
force Fr on the block in this range is inversely
proportional to x over this range,

—k
F, =7 forO.1<x<2.01m

= O forx< 0.1m and x> 2.01m

where k = 0.5 J. What is the final kinetic
energy and speed or. of the block as it
crosses this patch ?

 

Answer From Eq. (6.8a)

2.01 —k
Kf 2K. + I de
x
0.1

=5mv3—k1n<x)la:$l

zérnuf —kln(2.01/O.l)

=2—O.5 In (20.1)
22— 1.5 =O.5J

vf =1’2Kf/m=lms_1

Here, note that In is a symbol for the natural
logarithm to the base 6 and not the logarithm to
the base 10 [lnX=logeX= 2.3O3log10X]. 4

6.7 THE CONCEPT OF POTENTIAL ENERGY

The word potential suggests possibility or
capacity for action. The term potential energy
brings to one’s mind ‘stored’ energy. A stretched
bow-string possesses potential energy. When it
is released, the arrow ﬂies off at a great speed.
The earth’s crust is not uniform, but has
discontinuities and dislocations that are called
fault lines. These fault lines in the earth’s crust

are like ‘compressed springs’. They possess a
large amount of potential energy. An earthquake
results when these fault lines readjust. Thus,
potential energy is the ‘stored energy’ by virtue
of the position or configuration of a body. The
body left to itself releases this stored energy in
the form of kinetic energy. Let us make our notion
of potential energy more concrete.

The gravitational force on a ball of mass m is
my . 9 may be treated as a constant near the earth
surface. By ‘near’ we imply that the height h of
the ball above the earth’s surface is very small
compared to the earth’s radius RE(h <<RE) so that
we can ignore the variation of 9 near the earth’s

surface*. In what follows we have taken the
upward direction to be positive. Let us raise the
ball up to a height h The work done by the external
agency against the gravitational force is mgh This
work gets stored as potential energy.
Gravitational potential energy of an object, as a
function of the height h, is denoted by V(h) and it
is the negative of work done by the gravitational
force in raising the object to that height.
V(h) = mgh

If h is taken as a variable, it is easily seen that
the gravitational force F equals the negative of
the derivative of V(h) with respect to h. Thus,

d
F=——V =—
dh (h) mg

The negative sign indicates that the
gravitational force is downward. When released,
the ball comes down with an increasing speed.
Just before it hits the ground, its speed is given
by the kinematic relation,

v2 2 29h
This equation can be written as
l 2 h
—mv=m
2 g

which shows that the gravitational potential
energy of the object at height h, when the object
is released, manifests itself as kinetic energy of
the object on reaching the ground.

Physically, the notion of potential energy is
applicable only to the class of forces where work
done against the force gets ‘stored up’ as energy.
When external constraints are removed, it
manifests itself as kinetic energy. Mathematically,
(for simplicity, in one dimension) the potential

* The variation of g with height is discussed in Chapter 8 on Gravitation.

2019-20