Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

above the water surface is totally absent and the beam is totally reﬂected
back to water. This is total internal reﬂection at its simplest.

Pour this water in a long test tube and shine the laser light from top,
as shown in Fig. 9.13(c). Adjust the direction of the laser beam such that
it is totally internally reﬂected every time it strikes the walls of the tube.
This is similar to what happens in optical ﬁbres.

Take care not to look into the laser beam directly and not to point it
at anybody’s face.

(a)

9.4. 1 Total internal reﬂection in nature and
its technological applications

(i) Mirage: On hot summer days, the air near the ground becomes hotter (bl
than the air at higher levels. The refractive index of air increases with
its density. Hotter air is less dense, and has smaller refractive index
than the cooler air. If the air currents are small, that is, the air is still,
the optical density at different layers of air increases with height. As a
result, light from a tall object such as a tree, passes through a medium
whose refractive index decreases towards the ground. Thus, a ray of
light from such an object successively bends away from the normal
and undergoes total internal reﬂection, if the angle of incidence for
the air near the ground exceeds the critical angle. This is shown in (C)
Fig. 9.14(b). To a distant observer, the light appears to be coming FIGURE 9J3
from somewhere below the ground. The observer naturally assumes Observing total
that light is being reﬂected from the ground, say, by a pool of water internal reﬂection in
near the tall object. Such inverted images of distant tall objects cause water with a 1aser
an optical illusion to the observer. This phenomenon is called mirage. beam (refraction due
This type of mirage is especially common in hot deserts. Some of you to glass of beaker
might have noticed that while moving in a bus or a car during a hot negleﬂed being Very
summer day, a distant patch of road, especially on a highway, appears thin)-
to be wet. But, you do not find any evidence of wetness when you
reach that spot. This is also due to mirage.

      

Air at a uniform

temperature Air warmer near ground I

,__—

 

 
 

(a)

(bl

FIGURE 9.14 (a) A tree is seen by an observer at its place when the air above the ground is
at uniform temperature. [b] When the layers of air close to the ground have varying
temperature with hottest layers near the ground. light from a distant tree may
undergo total internal reﬂection. and the apparent image of the tree may create
an illusion to the observer that the tree is near a pool of water. 321

2019-20