Electric Charges
and Fields

at that point. The charge Q, which is producing the electric field, is
called a source charge and the charge q, which tests the effect of a
source charge, is called a test charge. Note that the source charge Q
must remain at its original location. However, if a charge q is brought
at any point around Q, Q itself is bound to experience an electrical
force due to q and will tend to move. Away out of this difficulty is to
make q negligibly small. The force F is then negligibly small but the
ratio F / q is finite and defines the electric field:

E =11m£§j (1.9)

an q

A practical way to get around the problem (of keeping Q undisturbed
in the presence of q) is to hold Q to its location by unspecified forces!
This may look strange but actually this is what happens in practice.
When we are considering the electric force on a test charge q due to a
charged planar sheet (Section 1.1 5), the charges on the sheet are held to
their locations by the forces due to the unspeciﬁed charged constituents
inside the sheet.

(ii) Note that the electric field E due to Q, though deﬁned operationally
in terms of some test charge q, is independent of q. This is because
F is proportional to q, so the ratio F/ q does not depend on q. The
force F on the charge q due to the charge Q depends on the particular
location of charge q which may take any value in the space around
the charge Q. Thus, the electric ﬁeld E due to Q is also dependent on
the space coordinate r. For different positions of the charge q all over
the space, we get different values of electric field E. The field exists at
every point in three-dimensional space.

(iii) For a positive charge, the electric field will be directed radially
outwards from the charge. On the other hand, if the source charge is
negative, the electric ﬁeld vector, at each point, points radially inwards.

(iv) Since the magnitude of the force F on charge q due to charge Q
depends only on the distance r of the charge q from charge Q,
the magnitude of the electric field E will also depend only on the
distance r. Thus at equal distances from the charge Q, the magnitude
of its electric field E is same. The magnitude of electric field E due to
a point charge is thus same on a sphere with the point charge at its
centre; in other words, it has a spherical symmetry.

1.8. 1 Electric ﬁeld due to a system of charges

Consider a system of charges q1, q2, qn with position vectors r1,
r2, rn relative to some origin 0. Like the electric field at a point in
space due to a single charge, electric field at a point in space due to the
system of charges is defined to be the force experienced by a unit
test charge placed at that point, without disturbing the original
positions of charges q1, q2, qn. We can use Coulomb’s law and the
superposition principle to determine this field at a point P denoted by

position vector 1'.

2019-20

19