68

PHYSICS

arranged head to tail, this graphical method is
called the head-to-tail method. The two vectors
and their resultant form three sides of a triangle,
so this method is also known as triangle method
of vector addition. If we find the resultant of
B + A as in Fig. 4.4(c), the same vector R is
obtained. Thus, vector addition is commutative:

A+B=B+A (4.1)

The addition of vectors also obeys the associative
law as illustrated in Fig. 4.4(d). The result of
adding vectors A and B first and then adding
vector C is the same as the result of adding B
and C first and then adding vector A :

(A+B)+C=A+(B+C) (4.2)

What is the result of adding two equal and
opposite vectors ? Consider two vectors A and
—A shown in Fig. 4.3(b). Their sum is A + (—A).
Since the magnitudes of the two vectors are the
same, but the directions are opposite, the
resultant vector has zero magnitude and is
represented by 0 called a null vector or a zero
vector :

A—A=0 |0|=O (4.3)
Since the magnitude of a null vector is zero, its
direction cannot be specified.

The null vector also results when we multiply
a vector A by the number zero. The main
properties of 0 are :

A+0=A
7&0=0
OA=0 (4.4)

(a)

What is the physical meaning of a zero vector?
Consider the position and displacement vectors
in a plane as shown in Fig. 4. 1(a). Now suppose
that an object which is at P at time t, moves to
P’ and then comes back to P. Then, what is its
displacement? Since the initial and final
positions coincide, the displacement is a “null
vector”.

Subtraction of vectors can be defined in terms
of addition of vectors. We define the difference
of two vectors A and B as the sum of two vectors
A and —B :

A— B = A + (—B) (4.5)

It is shown in Fig 4.5. The vector —B is added to
vectorA to get R2 = (A — B). The vector R1= A + B
is also shown in the same figure for comparison.
We can also use the parallelogram method to
find the sum of two vectors. Suppose we have
two vectors A and B. To add these vectors, we
bring their tails to a common origin 0 as
shown in Fig. 4.6(a). Then we draw a line from
the head of A parallel to B and another line from
the head of B parallel to A to complete a
parallelogram OQSP. Now we join the point of
the intersection of these two lines to the origin
0. The resultant vector R is directed from the
common origin 0 along the diagonal (OS) of the
parallelogram [Fig. 4.6(b)]. In Fig.4.6(c), the
triangle law is used to obtain the resultant of A
and B and we see that the two methods yield the
same result. Thus, the two methods are
equivalent.

 

(b)

Fig. 4.5 (a) Two vectors A and B, — B is also shown. (b) Subtracting vector B from vectorA — the result is R2. For
comparison, addition of vectors A and B, i.e. R1 is also shown.

2019-20