382

i Physics

 

 

is the same measured along any ray. This principle leads to the well
known laws of reﬂection and refraction.

3. The principle of superposition of waves applies whenever two or more
sources of light illuminate the same point. When we consider the
intensity of light due to these sources at the given point, there is an
interference term in addition to the sum of the individual intensities.
But this term is important only if it has a non—zero average, which
occurs only if the sources have the same frequency and a stable
phase difference.

4. Young’s double slit of separation 01 gives equally spaced fringes of
angular separation l/d. The source, mid—point of the slits, and central
bright fringe lie in a straight line. An extended source will destroy
the fringes if it subtends angle more than 1/ d at the slits.

5. A single slit of width a gives a diffraction pattern with gzcentral
maximum. The intensity falls to zero at angles of ia’i?’ etc.,

with successively weaker secondary maxima in between. Diffraction
limits the angular resolution of a telescope to II/ D where D is the
diameter. Two stars closer than this give strongly overlapping images.
Similarly, a microscope objective subtending angle Zﬁ at the focus,
in a medium of refractive index n, will just separate two objects spaced
at a distance 1/ (2n sin [3), which is the resolution limit of a
microscope. Diffraction determines the limitations of the concept of
light rays. A beam of width (1 travels a distance a2 /1, called the Fresnel
distance, before it starts to spread out due to diffraction.

6. Natural light, e. g., from the sun is unpolarised. This means the electric
vector takes all possible directions in the transverse plane, rapidly
and randomly, during a measurement. A polaroid transmits only one
component [parallel to a special axis). The resulting light is called
linearly polarised or plane polarised. When this kind of light is viewed
through a second polaroid whose axis turns through 27:, two maxima
and minima of intensity are seen. Polarised light can also be produced
by reﬂection at a special angle [called the Brewster angle) and by
scattering through 7t / 2 in the earth’s atmosphere.

POINTS TO PONDER

Waves from a point source spread out in all directions, while light was
seen to travel along narrow rays. It required the insight and experiment
of Huygens, Young and Fresnel to understand how a wave theory could
explain all aspects of the behaviour of light.

The crucial new feature of waves is interference of amplitudes from different

sources which can be both constructive and destructive, as shown in
Young’s experiment.

Diffraction phenomena define the limits of ray optics. The limit of the
ability of microscopes and telescopes to distinguish very close objects is
set by the wavelength of light.

Most interference and diffraction effects exist even for longitudinal waves
like sound in air. But polarisation phenomena are special to transverse
waves like light waves.

2019-20