7O

 

a given vector into two component vectors along
a set of two vectors — all the three lie in the same
plane. It is convenient to resolve a general vector
along the axes of a rectangular coordinate
system using vectors of unit magnitude. These
are called unit vectors that we discuss now. A
unit vector is a vector of unit magnitude and
points in a particular direction. It has no
dimension and unit. It is used to specify a
direction only. Unit vectors along the x—, y- and
z—axes of a rectangular coordinate system are

denoted by i 3 and 1}, respectively, as shown

in Fig. 4.9(a).
Since these are unit vectors, we have

 

 

 

= ll‘: |=1 (4.9)

ﬂ.)

 

These unit vectors are perpendicular to each
other. In this text, they are printed in bold face
with a cap (A) to distinguish them from other
vectors. Since we are dealing with motion in two
dimensions in this chapter, we require use of
only two unit vectors. If we multiply a unit vector,

say 13 by a scalar, the result is a vector

A. = kﬁ. In general, a vector A can be written as
A = IAI ﬁ (4.10)

where fl is a unit vector along A.

We can now resolve a vector A in terms
of component vectors that lie along unit vectors

i and 3. Consider a vector A that lies in x—y

plane as shown in Fig. 4.9(b). We draw lines from
the head of A perpendicular to the coordinate
axes as in Fig. 4.9(b), and get vectors Al and A2

A

such that Al + A2 = A. Since Al is parallel to i

y

 

 

PHYSICS
and A2 is parallel to 3, we have :
A1=Ax§, 112:ij (4.11)
where AX and Ag are real numbers.
Thus, A = AX 3+ ij (4.12)

This is represented in Fig. 4.9(c). The quantities
AX and Ag are called x—, and y- components of the
vector A. Note that AX is itself not a vector, but

AX i is a vector, and so is Ag 3. Using simple
trigonometry, we can express AX and Ag in terms
of the magnitude of A and the angle 0y it makes
with the x— axis.

AX =Acos 0
Ag = A sin 6 (4.13)

As is clear from Eq. (4.13), a component of a
vector can be positive, negative or zero
depending on the value of 0.

Now, we have two ways to specify a vector A
in a plane. It can be specified by :
(i) its magnitude A and the direction 9 it makes

with the x—axis; or

(ii) its components AX and Ag

If A and 9 are given, Axand Ay can be obtained
using Eq. (4.13). If AX and Ag are given, A and 0
can be obtained as follows :

Ai + A5 = AZCOSZB + Azsin26

=A2
Or, A: 1lAi+Aj (4.14)
d tan9= i 9: tan’1i 5
An Ax, Ax (4.1 )

 

Fig. 4.9 (a) Unit vectors i , j and k lie along the x—, y—, and z axes (b) A vectorA is resolved into its
components AX and Ag along x—, and y— axes. [c] A and A2 expressed in terms of' 1 and j.

2019-20