88

i Physics

2.17

2.18

2.19

2.20

2.21

2.22

 

(b) Show that the tangential component of electrostatic field is
continuous from one side of a charged surface to another.
[Hintz For (a), use Gauss’s law. For, (b) use the fact that work
done by electrostatic field on a closed loop is zero.]

A long charged cylinder of linear charged density 1 is surrounded
by a hollow co-axial conducting cylinder. What is the electric ﬁeld in
the space between the two cylinders?

In a hydrogen atom, the electron and proton are bound at a distance
of about 0.53 A:

(a) Estimate the potential energy of the system in eV, taking the
zero of the potential energy at infinite separation of the electron
from proton.

(b) What is the minimum work required to free the electron, given
that its kinetic energr in the orbit is half the magnitude of
potential energy obtained in (a)?

(c) What are the answers to (a) and (b) above if the zero of potential
energy is taken at 1.06 A separation?

If one of the two electrons of a H2 molecule is removed, we get a
hydrogen molecular ion H;. In the ground state of an H;, the two
protons are separated by roughly 1.5 A, and the electron is roughly
1 A from each proton. Determine the potential energy of the system.
Specify your choice of the zero of potential energy.

Two charged conducting spheres of radii a and b are connected to
each other by a wire. What is the ratio of electric fields at the surfaces
of the two spheres? Use the result obtained to explain why charge
density on the sharp and pointed ends of a conductor is higher
than on its ﬂatter portions.

Two charges —q and +q are located at points (0, 0, —a) and (O, O, a),
respectively.

(a) What is the electrostatic potential at the points (0, 0, z) and
(x, y, 0) ?

(b) Obtain the dependence of potential on the distance r of a point
from the origin when r/a >> 1.

(c) How much work is done in moving a small test charge from the
point (5,0,0) to (—7,0,0) along the x—axis? Does the answer
change if the path of the test charge between the same points
is not along the x—axis?

Figure 2.32 shows a charge array known as an electric quadrupole.
For a point on the axis of the quadrupole, obtain the dependence
of potential on r for r/ a >> 1, and contrast your results with that
due to an electric dipole, and an electric monopole (i.e., a single
charge).

o—u—c -------------------------- 0P
q _q —q q
4— r —_>
FIGURE 2.32

2019-20