l Physics

 

FIGURE 10.1 (b) At a
large distance from
the source. a small

portion of the
spherical wave can

be approximated by a

plane wave.

t=0 t=T

FIGURE 10.3
Huygens geometrical
construction for a
plane wave
propagating to the
right. FI F2 is the
plane wavefront at
t= 0 and (3le is the
wavefront at a later
time 1'. The lines AxAz.
BIB2 etc. are
nomial to both Fle
and GXG2 and
represent rays.

354

small portion of the sphere can be considered as a plane and we have
What is known as a plane wave [Fig. 10.1(b)].

Now, if we know the shape of the wavefront at t = 0, then Huygens
principle allows us to determine the shape of the wavefront at a later
time T. Thus, Huygens principle is essentially a geometrical construction,
which given the shape of the wafefront at any time allows us to determine
the shape of the wavefront at a later time. Let us consider a diverging
wave and let F1F2 represent a portion of the spherical wavefront at t= 0
(Fig. 10.2). Now, according to Huygens principle, each point of the
wavefront is the source of a secondary disturbance and the wavelets
emanating from these points spread out in all directions with the speed
of the wave. These wavelets emanating from the wavefront are usually
referred to as secondary wavelets and if we draw a common tangent
to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the wavefront at a
later time.

 

FIGURE 10.2 FIF2 represents the spherical wavefront (with O as
centre) at t = O. The envelope of the secondary wavelets
emanating from FIF2 produces the forward moving wavefront GIGZ.
The backwave DID2 does not exist.

Thus, if we wish to determine the shape of the wavefront at t= T, we
draw spheres of radius UT from each point on the spherical wavefront
where v represents the speed of the waves in the medium. If we now draw
a common tangent to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the
wavefront at t= T. The new wavefront shown as G1G2 in Fig. 10.2 is again
spherical with point 0 as the centre.

The above model has one shortcoming: we also have a backwave which
is shown as D1D2 in Fig. 10.2. Huygens argued that the amplitude of the
secondary wavelets is maximum in the forward direction and zero in the
backward direction; by making this adhoc assumption, Huygens could
explain the absence of the backwave. However, this adhoc assumption is
not satisfactory and the absence of the backwave is really j ustiﬁed from
more rigorous wave theory.

In a similar manner, we can use Huygens principle to determine the
shape of the wavefront for a plane wave propagating through a medium
(Fig. 10.3).

2019-20