Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

the laws of refraction and ﬁnd the point where . .

the refracted rays meet (or appear to meet). In ObJCCt 4— v —>

practice, however, it is convenient to choose any

two of the following rays:

(i) A ray emanating from the object parallel to
the principal axis of the lens after refraction
passes through the second principal focus
F’ (in a convex lens) or appears to diverge (in
a concave lens) from the ﬁrst principal focus F. Image

(ii) A ray of light, passing through the optical '
centre of the lens, emerges without any
deviation after refraction.

(iii) A ray of light passing through the first
principal focus (for a convex lens) or
appearing to meet at it (for a concave lens)
emerges parallel to the principal axis after
refraction.

Figures 9.19(a) and (b) illustrate these rules
for a convex and a concave lens, respectively.
You should practice drawing similar ray
diagrams for different positions of the object with (b)
respect to the lens and also verify that the lens
formula, Eq. (9.23), holds good for all cases.

Here again it must be remembered that each
point on an object gives out inﬁnite number of
rays. All these rays will pass through the same image point after refraction
at the lens.

Magniﬁcation (m) produced by a lens is defined, like that for a mirror,
as the ratio of the size of the image to that of the object. Proceeding in the
same way as for spherical mirrors, it is easily seen that for a lens
_ h' _ v
m — h — u (9.24)

When we apply the sign convention, we see that, for erect (and virtual)
image formed by a convex or concave lens, m is positive, while for an
inverted (and real) image, m is negative.

 
   

 

--------q

(a)

 

FIGURE 9.19 Tracing rays through (a)
convex lens (b) concave lens.

 

Example 9.7 A magician during a show makes a glass lens with
n = 1.47 disappear in a trough of liquid. What is the refractive index
of the liquid? Could the liquid be water?

Solution

The refractive index of the liquid must be equal to 1.47 in order to
make the lens disappear. This means n1 = n2. This gives 1 / f =0 or
f —9 oo. The lens in the liquid will act like a plane sheet of glass. No,

the liquid is not water. It could be glycerine.

L'6 mama

9.5.3 Power of a lens

Power of a lens is a measure of the convergence or divergence, which a
lens introduces in the light falling on it. Clearly, a lens of shorter focal 327

2019-20