Electric Charges
and Fields

the density of a liquid, we are referring to its macroscopic density. We
regard it as a continuous ﬂuid and ignore its discrete molecular
constitution.

The field due to a continuous charge distribution can be obtained in
much the same way as for a system of discrete charges, Eq. ( l. 10). Suppose
a continuous charge distribution in space has a charge density p. Choose
any convenient origin 0 and let the position vector of any point in the
charge distribution be r. The charge density p may vary from point to
point, i.e., it is a function of 1'. Divide the charge distribution into small
volume elements of size AV. The charge in a volume element AVis pAV.

Now, consider any general point P (inside or outside the distribution)
with position vector R (Fig. 1.24). Electric field due to the charge pAVis
given by Coulomb’s law:

1 p AV f,
47580 r12 (1 .26)

where r’ is the distance between the charge element and P, and r’ is a
unit vector in the direction from the charge element to P. By the
superposition principle, the total electric field due to the charge
distribution is obtained by summing over electric fields due to different
volume elements:

1 pAV-,

4,180 MEN #2 r (1.27)

Note that p, r’, i-’ all can vary from point to point. In a strict
mathematical method, we should let AV—>O and the sum then becomes
an integral; but we omit that discussion here, for simplicity. In short,
using Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle, electric ﬁeld can
be determined for any charge distribution, discrete or continuous or part
discrete and part continuous.

1. 14 GAUss’s LAW

As a simple application of the notion of electric ﬂux, let us consider the
total ﬂux through a sphere of radius r, which encloses a point charge q
at its centre. Divide the sphere into small area elements, as shown in
Fig. 1.25.

The ﬂux through an area element AS is

AE=

 

 

EE

 

 

q -
A : E-ASz r-AS
(5 475809 (1.28)

where we have used Coulomb’s law for the electric field due to a single
charge q. The unit vector i‘ is along the radius vector from the centre to
the area element. Now, since the normal to a sphere at every point is
along the radius vector at that point, the area element AS and i' have
the same direction. Therefore,

M5 = L2 AS (1 29)

47180 r '

since the magnitude of a unit vector is l.

The total ﬂux through the sphere is obtained by adding up ﬂux
through all the different area elements:

 

2019-20

 

FIGURE 1.25 Flux

through a sphere

enclosing a point
charge (1 at its centre.

33