succeeded in producing and observing electromagnetic
waves of much shorter wavelength (25 mm to 5 mm).
His experiment, like that of Hertz’s, was conﬁned to the
laboratory.

At around the same time, Guglielmo Marconi in Italy
followed Hertz’s work and succeeded in transmitting
electromagnetic waves over distances of many kilometres.
Marconi’s experiment marks the beginning of the ﬁeld of
communication using electromagnetic waves.

8.3.2 Nature of electromagnetic waves

It can be shown from Maxwell’s equations that electric
and magnetic ﬁelds in an electromagnetic wave are
perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of
propagation. It appears reasonable, say from our
discussion of the displacement current. Consider
Fig. 8.2. The electric ﬁeld inside the plates of the capacitor
is directed perpendicular to the plates. The magnetic
ﬁeld this gives rise to via the displacement current is
along the perimeter of a circle parallel to the capacitor
plates. So B and E are perpendicular in this case. This
is a general feature.

In Fig. 8.4, we show a typical example of a plane
electromagnetic wave propagating along the z direction
(the ﬁelds are shown as a function of the z coordinate,
at a given time t). The electric ﬁeld Ex is along the x—axis,
and varies sinusoidally with 2, at a given time. The
magnetic ﬁeld By is along the y-axis, and again varies
sinusoidally with z. The electric and magnetic ﬁelds Ex
and By are perpendicular to each other, and to the
direction 2 of propagation. We can write Ex and By as
follows:

Ex: EO sin (kz—wt) [8.7(a)]
By: B0 sin (kz—cot) [87le
Here k is related to the wave length )1 of the wave by the
usual equation

27:

k = 7 (8.8)

and a) is the angular frequency.
k is the magnitude of the wave
vector (or propagation vector) k
and its direction describes the

Electromagnetic
Woves

 

Heinrich Rudolf Hertz:
(1857 - 1894) German
physicist who was the
first to broadcast and
receive; radio waves. He
produced \ electro-
magnetic waves, sent
them through space, and
measured their wave-
length and speed. He
showed that the nature
of their vibration,
reﬂection and refraction
was the same as that of
light and heat waves,
establishing their
identity for the ﬁrst time.
He also pioneered
research on discharge of
electricity through gases,
and discovered the
photoelectric effect.

(176811.981) ZLHEIH .rI’IOGle HOIHNICEIH

 

 

direction of propagation of the
wave. The speed of propagation
of the wave is (co/k). Using
Eqs. [8.7(a) and (b)] for Ex and By
and Maxwell’s equations, one 275
ﬁnds that

FIGURE 8.4 A linearly polarised electromagnetic wave.
propagating in the z—direction with the oscillating electric field E
along the X—direction and the oscillating magnetic field B along
the y-direction.

2019-20