Electric Charges
and Fields

 

arise instantaneously. There will be some time delay between the effect
(force on q2) and the cause (motion of ‘11)- It is precisely here that the
notion of electric ﬁeld (strictly, electromagnetic ﬁeld) is natural and very
useful. The ﬁeld picture is this: the accelerated motion of charge q1
produces electromagnetic waves, which then propagate with the speed
c, reach q2 and cause a force on q2. The notion of ﬁeld elegantly accounts
for the time delay. Thus, even though electric and magnetic fields can be
detected only by their effects (forces) on charges, they are regarded as
physical entities, not merely mathematical constructs. They have an
independent dynamics of their own, i.e., they evolve according to laws
of their own. They can also transport energy. Thus, a source of time-
dependent electromagnetic fields, turned on for a short interval of time
and then switched off, leaves behind propagating electromagnetic fields
transporting energy. The concept of field was first introduced by Faraday
and is now among the central concepts in physics.

Example 1.8 An electron falls through a distance of 1.5 cm in a
uniform electric field of magnitude 2.0 X 104 N C“1 [Fig l.13(a)]. The
direction of the field is reversed keeping its magnitude unchanged
and a proton falls through the same distance [Fig 1.13(b)]. Compute
the time of fall in each case. Contrast the situation with that of ‘free
fall under gravity’.

mm

(a) (b)
FIGURE 1.13

Solution In Fig. l.13(a) the field is upward, so the negatively charged
electron experiences a downward force of magnitude eE where E is
the magnitude of the electric field. The acceleration of the electron is

ae = eE/me

where me is the mass of the electron.

Starting from rest, the time required by the electron to fall through a

2h 2hme
distance h is given by t,a = a = eE

Fme=L6XKW%Jm=9Jle$Wg
E=20xuﬁNcﬂh=15xlaﬁm

g=29xia%

In Fig. 1.13 (b), the field is downward, and the positively charged
proton experiences a downward force of magnitude eE. The
acceleration of the proton is

 

 

ap = eE/mp

where m is the mass of the proton; mp = 1.67 X 10“27 kg. The time of
fall for the proton is

8'1 31:1qu

2019-20

21