G RAVITATI ON I 9 7
—

 

India's Leap into Space
India started its space programme in 1962 when Indian National Committee for Space Research was set
up by the Government of India which was superseded by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)
in 1969. ISRO identiﬁed the role and importance of space technology in nation‘s development and
bringing space to the service of the common man. India launched its ﬁrst low orbit satellite Aryabhata in
1975, for which the launch vehicle was provided by the erstwhile Soviet Union. ISRO started employing its
indigenous launching vehicle in 1979 by sending Rohini series of satellites into space from its main
launch site at Satish Dhawan Space Center. Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh. The tremendous progress in
India’s space programme has made ISRO one of the six largest space agencies in the world. ISRO
develops and delivers application specific satellite products and tools for broadcasts. communication.
weather forecasts, disaster management tools. Geographic Information System. cartography. navigation.
telemedicine, dedicated distance education satellite etc. In order to achieve complete self—reliance in
these applications, cost effective and reliable Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle [PSLV) was developed in
early 19905. PSLV has thus become a favoured carrier for satellites of various countries, promoting
unprecedented international collaboration. In 2001, the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle [GSLVj
was developed for launching heavier and more demanding Geosynchronous communication satellites.
Various research centers and autonomous institutions for remote sensing. astronomy and astrophysics,
atmospheric sciences and space research are functioning under the aegis of the Department of Space.
Government of India. Success of lunar [Chandrayaan] and inter planetary (Mangalyaan) missions along
with other scientiﬁc projects has been landmark achievements of ISRO. Future endeavors of ISRO in—
clude human space ﬂight projects, the development of heavy lift launchers. reusable launch vehicles,
semi—cryogenic engines, single and two stage to orbit ($810 and TSTO) vehicles. development and use of
composite materials for space application etc. In 1984 Rakesh Sharma became the ﬁrst Indian to go into

outer space aboard in a USSR spaceship. [www.isro.gov.in)

 

 

Thus radio waves broadcast from an antenna at close distances with good resolution.

can be received at points far away where the Information gathered from such satellites
direct wave fail to reach on account of the is extremely useful for remote sensing,

curvature of the earth. Waves used in television
broadcast or other forms of communication have
much higher frequencies and thus cannot be
received beyond the line of sight. A Geostationery
satellite, appearing ﬁxed above the broadcasting
station can however receive these signals and
broadcast them back to a wide area on earth.
The INSAT group of satellites sent up by India
are one such group of Geostationary satellites
widely used for telecommunications in India.
Another class of satellites are called the Polar
satellites (Fig. 8.1 1). These are low altitude (h z
500 to 800 km) satellites, but they go around
the poles of the earth in a north-south direction
whereas the earth rotates around its axis in an
east-west direction. Since its time period is
around 100 minutes it crosses any altitude many
times a day. However, since its height h above
the earth is about 500-800 km, a camera fixed
on it can view only small strips of the earth in
one orbit. Adjacent strips are viewed in the next
orbit, so that in effect the whole earth can be
viewed strip by strip during the entire day. These
satellites can view polar and equatorial regions

meterology as well as for environmental studies
of the earth.

8. 12 WEIGHTLESSNESS

Weight of an object is the force with which the
earth attracts it. We are conscious of our own
weight when we stand on a surface, since the
surface exerts a force opposite to our weight to
keep us at rest. The same principle holds good
when we measure the weight of an object by a
spring balance hung from a fixed point e. g. the
ceiling. The object would fall down unless it is
subject to a force opposite to gravity. This is
exactly what the spring exerts on the object. This
is because the spring is pulled down a little by
the gravitational pull of the object and in turn the
spring exerts a force on the object vertically upwards.

Now, imagine that the top end of the balance
is no longer held fixed to the top ceiling of the
room. Both ends of the spring as well as the
object move with identical acceleration g. The
spring is not stretched and does not exert any
upward force on the obj ect which is moving down
with acceleration 9 due to gravity. The reading

2019-20