MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

 

on the other side, with its horizontal edge just
over water. The vessel is raised slightly till the
liquid just touches the glass plate and pulls it
down a little because of surface tension. Weights
are added till the plate just clears water.

 

Fig. 1 0. 1 8 Measuring Surface Tension.

Suppose the additional weight required is W.
Then from Eq. 10.22 and the discussion given
there, the surface tension of the liquid-air
interface is

s,,= (W/2z) = (mg/21)

where m is the extra mass and lis the length of
the plate edge. The subscript (la) emphasises
the fact that the liquid-air interface tension is
involved.

(10.23)

10.6.3 Angle of Contact

The surface of liquid near the plane of contact,
with another medium is in general curved. The
angle between tangent to the liquid surface at
the point of contact and solid surface inside the
liquid is termed as angle of contact. It is denoted
by 0. It is different at interfaces of different pairs
of liquids and solids. The value of 6 determines
whether a liquid will spread on the surface of a
solid or it will form droplets on it. For example,
water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in
Fig. 10.19 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic
plate as shown in Fig. 10.19(b).

2 6 7
Sla
‘
Ssa Ssl
(a) S1a
A
S S

sa 5]

(b)

Fig. 1 O. 1 9 Different shapes of water drops with
interfacial tensions (a) on a lotus leaf (b)
on a clean plastic plate.

We consider the three interfacial tensions at
all the three interfaces, liquid-air, solid-air and
solid-liquid denoted by Sla, Ssa and S81 , respectively
as given in Fig. 10.19 (a) and (b). At the line of
contact, the surface forces between the three media
must be in equilibrium. From the Fig. 10. 19(b) the
following relation is easily derived.

Slacos 0 + 881: S

sa (10.24)

The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if
SSl > Sla as in the case of water-leaf interface
while it is an acute angle if SSl < Sla as in the
case of water-plastic interface. When 6 is an
obtuse angle then molecules of liquids are
attracted strongly to themselves and weakly to
those of solid, it costs a lot of energy to create a
liquid-solid surface, and liquid then does not
wet the solid. This is what happens with water
on a waxy or oily surface, and with mercury on
any surface. On the other hand, if the molecules

of the liquid are strongly attracted to those of

2019-20