80

PHYSICS

 

    

(b1)

 

(b) (c)

Fig. 4. 1 9 Velocity and acceleration of an object in unifom circular motion. The time interval At decreases from
(a) to (c) where it is zero. The acceleration is directed, at each point of the path, towards the centre of

the circle.

Let r and r’ be the position vectors and v and
v’ the velocities of the object when it is at point P
and P’ as shown in Fig. 4.19(a). By definition,
velocity at a point is along the tangent at that
point in the direction of motion. The velocity
vectors v and v’ are as shown in Fig. 4.19(a1).
Av is obtained in Fig. 4. 19 (a2) using the triangle
law of vector addition. Since the path is circular,
v is perpendicular to r and so is v’ to r’.
Therefore, Av is perpendicular to Ar. Since

A I
average acceleration is along Av L5 : —VJ, the

At
average acceleration E is perpendicular to Ar. If
we place Av on the line that bisects the angle
between 1' and 1" , we see that it is directed towards
the centre of the circle. Figure 4.19(b) shows the
same quantities for smaller time interval. Av and

hence E is again directed towards the centre.

In Fig. 4.19(c), At-> O and the average
acceleration becomes the instantaneous
acceleration. It is directed towards the centre*.
Thus, we find that the acceleration of an object
in uniform circular motion is always directed
towards the centre of the circle. Let us now find
the magnitude of the acceleration.

The magnitude of a is, by definition, given by

I l l |Av|
a = ' —
Alm—> 0 At

Let the angle between position vectors 1' and

1" be A0. Since the velocity vectors v and v’ are
always perpendicular to the position vectors, the
angle between them is also A0 . Therefore, the
triangle CPP’ formed by the position vectors and

the triangle GHI formed by the velocity vectors
v, v’ and Av are similar (Fig. 4.19a). Therefore,
the ratio of the base-length to side-length for
one of the triangles is equal to that of the other
triangle. That is :

 

 

‘Av‘ ‘Ar‘
U — R
lArl
Or, IAv|=v—
R
Therefore,
IAVI lerl v lArl
|a|= lim —— -— lim —

 

_ lim _
At—>0 At At—>0RAt RAt—>0 At

If At is small, A9 will also be small and then arc
PP’ can be approximately taken to be I Arl :

IArI z vAt

_:U
01" At—>0At

Therefore, the centripetal acceleration aC is :

* In the limit At—~ 0, Ar becomes perpendicular to r. In this limit Ave 0 and is consequently also perpendicular
to V. Therefore, the acceleration is directed towards the centre, at each point of the circular path.

2019-20