OSCILLATIONS

343

 

which are either too fast or too slow on the scale
of seconds, other convenient units of time are
used. The period of vibrations of a quartz crystal
is expressed in units of microseconds (10'6 s)
abbreviated as us. On the other hand, the orbital
period of the planet Mercury is 88 earth days.
The Halley’s comet appears after every 76 years.

The reciprocal of T gives the number of
repetitions that occur per unit time. This
quantity is called the frequency of the periodic
motion. It is represented by the symbol v. The
relation between v and T is

v =1/T (14.1)

The unit of v is thus S'l. After the discoverer of
radio waves, Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1857— 1894),
a special name has been given to the unit of
frequency. It is called hertz (abbreviated as Hz).
Thus,

1 hertz = 1 Hz = l oscillation per second =IS'1
( 1 4. 2)

Note, that the frequency, v, is not necessarily
an integer.

Example 14.1 On an average. a human

heart is found to beat 75 times in a minute.
Calculate its frequency and period.

 

Answer The beat frequency of heart = 75/ (1 min)
= 75/ (60 s)
1.25 s-1
= 1.25 Hz
The time period T = 1/(1.25 s4)
= 0.8 s 4

14.2.2 Displacement

In section 4.2, we defined displacement of a
particle as the change in its position vector. In
this chapter, we use the term displacement
in a more general sense. It refers to change
with time of any physical property under
consideration. For example, in case of rectilinear
motion of a steel ball on a surface, the distance
from the starting point as a function of time is
its position displacement. The choice of origin
is a matter of convenience. Consider a block
attached to a spring, the other end of the spring
is fixed to a rigid wall [see Fig. l4.2(a)]. Generally,
it is convenient to measure displacement of the
body from its equilibrium position. For an
oscillating simple pendulum, the angle from the
vertical as a function of time may be regarded

as a displacement variable [see Fig. l4.2(b)]. The
term displacement is not always to be referred

 

Fig. 14.2(a) A block attached to a spring, the other
end of which is ﬁxed to a rigid wall. The
block moves on a frictionless surface. The
motion of the block can be described in
terms of its distance or displacement x

from the equilibrium position.

 

{.

Fig.14.2(b) An oscillating simple pendulum; its
motion can be described in terms of
angular displacement 0 from the vertical.

in the context of position only. There can be
many other kinds of displacement variables. The
voltage across a capacitor, changing with time
in an AC circuit, is also a displacement variable.
In the same way, pressure variations in time in
the propagation of sound wave, the changing
electric and magnetic fields in a light wave are
examples of displacement in different contexts.
The displacement variable may take both
positive and negative values. In experiments on
oscillations, the displacement is measured for
different times.

The displacement can be represented by a
mathematical function of time. In case of periodic
motion, this function is periodic in time. One of
the simplest periodic functions is given by

f(t) = A cos cot (14.3a)

If the argument of this function, cut, is
increased by an integral multiple of 27rradians,

2019-20