l Physics

 

  
   
   
 

Unregulated

voltage (V1)

Zener diode as a voltage regulator

We know that when the ac input voltage of a rectiﬁer ﬂuctuates, its rectiﬁed
output also ﬂuctuates. To get a constant dc voltage from the dc
unregulated output of a rectiﬁer, we use a Zener diode. The circuit diagram
of a voltage regulator using a Zener diode is shown in Fig. 14.22.

The unregulated dc voltage (ﬁltered output of a
rectiﬁer) is connected to the Zener diode through a series
resistance Rs such that the Zener diode is reverse biased.
If the input voltage increases, the current through RS
and Zener diode also increases. This increases the
voltage drop across Rs without any change in the
voltage across the Zener diode. This is because in the
Regulated breakdown region, Zener voltage remains constant even
Load voltage though the current through the Zener diode changes.

RL (Vz) Similarly, if the input voltage decreases, the current
through Rs and Zener diode also decreases. The voltage
drop across Rs decreases without any change in the

FIGURE 14.22 Zener diode as DC voltage across the Zener diode. Thus any increase/
V01t€1g€ regUlatOF decrease in the input voltage results in, increase/

486

EXAMPLE 14.5

decrease of the voltage drop across Rs without any
change in voltage across the Zener diode. Thus the Zener diode acts as a
voltage regulator. We have to select the Zener diode according to the
required output voltage and accordingly the series resistance Rs.

Example 14.5 In a Zener regulated power supply a Zener diode with
VZ = 6.0 V is used for regulation. The load current is to be 4.0 mA and
the unregulated input is 10.0 V. What should be the value of series
resistor RS?

Solution

The value of RS should be such that the current through the Zener
diode is much larger than the load current. This is to have good load
regulation. Choose Zener current as five times the load current, i.e.,
IZ = 20 mA. The total current through RS is, therefore, 24 mA. The
voltage drop across Rs is 10.0 — 6.0 = 4.0 V. This gives
RS = 4.0V/ (24 X 10's) A = 167 S2. The nearest value of carbon resistor
is 150 Q. So, a series resistor of 150 S2 is appropriate. Note that slight
variation in the value of the resistor does not matter, what is important
is that the current IZ should be sufficiently larger than IL.

14.8.2 Optoelectronic junction devices

We have seen so far, how a semiconductor diode behaves under applied
electrical inputs. In this section, we learn about semiconductor diodes in
which carriers are generated by photons (photo-excitation). All these
devices are called optoelectronic devices. We shall study the functioning
of the following optoelectronic devices:

(i) Photodiodes used for detecting optical signal (photodetectors).

(ii) Light emitting diodes (LED) which convert electrical energy into light.
(iii) Photovoltaic devices which convert optical radiation into electricity

(solar cells).

2019-20