258

PHYSICS

 

stream encounters rocks, small foamy
whirlpool-like regions called ‘white water
rapids are formed.

Figure 10.8 displays streamlines for some
typical ﬂows. For example, Fig. 10.8(a) describes
a laminar ﬂow where the velocities at different
points in the fluid may have different
magnitudes but their directions are parallel.
Figure 10.8 (b) gives a sketch of turbulent ﬂow.

(a) (b)

Fig. 10.8 (a) Some streamlines for ﬂuid ﬂow.
(b) A jet of air striking a ﬂat plate placed
perpendicular to it. This is an example
of turbulent ﬂow.

10.4 BERNOULLI'S PRINCIPLE

Fluid ﬂow is a complex phenomenon. But we
can obtain some useful properties for steady
or streamline ﬂows using the conservation
of energy.

Consider a ﬂuid moving in a pipe of varying
cross-sectional area. Let the pipe be at varying
heights as shown in Fig. 10.9. We now suppose
that an incompressible ﬂuid is ﬂowing through
the pipe in a steady ﬂow. Its velocity must
change as a consequence of equation of
continuity. A force is required to produce this
acceleration, which is caused by the ﬂuid
surrounding it, the pressure must be different
in different regions. Bernoulli’s equation is a
general expression that relates the pressure
difference between two points in a pipe to both
velocity changes (kinetic energy change) and
elevation (height) changes (potential energy

Daniel Bernoulli (1 700 —1 782)

change). The Swiss Physicist Daniel Bernoulli
developed this relationship in 1738.

Consider the ﬂow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC)
and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the ﬂuid initially lying
between B and D. In an infinitesimal time
interval At, this ﬂuid would have moved. Suppose
U1 is the speed at B and v2 at D, then ﬂuid initially
at B has moved a distance let to C (let is small
enough to assume constant cross-section along
BC). In the same interval At the ﬂuid initially at
D moves to E, a distance equal to v2At. Pressures
P1 and P2 act as shown on the plane faces of
areas A1 and A2 binding the two regions. The
work done on the ﬂuid at left end (BC) is W1 =
P1A1(v1At) = PIAV. Since the same volume AV
passes through both the regions (from the
equation of continuity) the work done by the ﬂuid
at the other end (DE) is W2 = P2A2(v2At) = P2AVor,
the work done on the ﬂuid is —P2AV. So the total
work done on the ﬂuid is

W1 — W2 = (Pl—P2) AV

Part of this work goes into changing the kinetic
energy of the ﬂuid, and part goes into changing
the gravitational potential energy. If the density
of the ﬂuid is p and Am = pAllet = pAV is the
mass passing through the pipe in time At, then
change in gravitational potential energy is

AU = pgAV (hZ—hl)

The change in its kinetic energy is

AK = p AV (1122—012)

We can employ the work — energy theorem
(Chapter 6) to this volume of the ﬂuid and
this yields

1
(Pl—P2) AV= (E) p AV(v22 —v12) + pgAV (h2—h1)
We now divide each term by AVto obtain

1
(Ia—P2) = [5) P (vi-v.21 + pg (re—h.)

Daniel Bernoulli was a Swiss scientist and mathematician. who along with Leonard
Euler had the distinction of winning the French Academy prize for mathematics
10 times. He also studied medicine and served as a professor of anatomy and

botany for a while at Basle. Switzerland. His most well—known work was in
hydrodynamics. a subject he developed from a single principle. the conservation of
. energy. His work included calculus probability the theory of vibrating strings.
and applied mathematics. He has been called the founder of mathematical physics.

2019-20