l Physics

II built-in potential V0. As a result, the depletion layer width
decreases and the barrier height is reduced [Fig. 14.13(b)]. The

 

—’|W|‘— effective barrier height under forward bias is (VO — V).
g: If the applied voltage is small, the barrier potential will be
P g: n reduced only slightly below the equilibrium value, and only a
as small number of carriers in the material—those that happen to

be in the uppermost energy levels—will possess enough energy
to cross the junction. So the current will be small. If we increase

(a) the applied voltage significantly, the barrier height will be reduced

and more number of carriers will have the required energy. Thus

the current increases.

V0 Due to the applied voltage, electrons from n-side cross the
depletion region and reach p-side (where they are minority
carries). Similarly, holes from p-side cross the junction and reach

(b) the n—side (where they are minority carries). This process under
forward bias is known as minority carrier injection. At the
junction boundary, on each side, the minority carrier
concentration increases significantly compared to the locations
far from the junction.

Due to this concentration gradient, the injected electrons on
p-side diffuse from the junction edge of p-side to the other end
of p-side. Likewise, the injected holes on n-side diffuse from the

OONh—I

FIGURE 14.13 (a) p—n
junction diode under forward
bias, (b) Barrier potential
(1) without battery. (2) Low
battery voltage. and (3) High
voltage batteiy.

 
   
 
 
   

:eeeae; junction edge of n-side to the other end of n-side
p gggggg n (Fig. 14.14). This motion of charged carriers on either side
3333:; gives rise to current. The total diode forward current is sum
’T‘ ’T‘ of hole diffusion current and conventional current due to

electron diffusion. The magnitude of this current is usually

In'ected In ected
J j in mA.

electrons holes

 
 

14.6.2 p-n junction diode under reverse bias

FIGURE 14' 14 Forward bias When an external voltage (V) is applied across the diode such
minority carrier in} ecum- that n-side is positive and p-side is negative, it is said to be
reverse biased [Fig.14.15(a)]. The applied voltage mostly
drops across the depletion region. The direction of applied voltage is same
as the direction of barrier potential. As a result, the barrier height increases
and the depletion region widens due to the change in the electric field.
The effective barrier height under reverse bias is (V0 + V), [Fig. 14.15(b)].
This suppresses the ﬂow of electrons from n —> p and holes from p a n.
Thus, diffusion current, decreases enormously compared to the diode
under forward bias.

The electric field direction of the junction is such that if electrons on
p-side or holes on n-side in their random motion come close to the
junction, they will be swept to its majority zone. This drift of carriers
gives rise to current. The drift current is of the order of a few uA. This is
quite low because it is due to the motion of carriers from their minority
side to their majority side across the junction. The drift current is also
there under forward bias but it is negligible (uA) when compared with
current due to injected carriers which is usually in mA.

The diode reverse current is not very much dependent on the applied
voltage. Even a small voltage is sufficient to sweep the minority carriers

480 from one side of the junction to the other side of the junction. The current

2019-20