Duol Nature of Radiation
and Mo’n‘er

stopped. These observations indicate that when ultraviolet radiations fall
on the emitter plate C, electrons are ejected from it which are attracted
towards the positive, collector plate A by the electric field. The electrons
ﬂow through the evacuated glass tube, resulting in the current ﬂow. Thus,
light falling on the surface of the emitter causes current in the external
circuit. Hallwachs and Lenard studied how this photo current varied with
collector plate potential, and with frequency and intensity of incident light.

Hallwachs, in 1888, undertook the study further and connected a
negatively charged zinc plate to an electroscope. He observed that the
zinc plate lost its charge when it was illuminated by ultraviolet light.
Further, the uncharged zinc plate became positively charged when it was
irradiated by ultraviolet light. Positive charge on a positively charged
zinc plate was found to be further enhanced when it was illuminated by
ultraviolet light. From these observations he concluded that negatively
charged particles were emitted from the zinc plate under the action of
ultraviolet light.

After the discovery of the electron in 1897, it became evident that the
incident light causes electrons to be emitted from the emitter plate. Due
to negative charge, the emitted electrons are pushed towards the collector
plate by the electric field. Hallwachs and Lenard also observed that when
ultraviolet light fell on the emitter plate, no electrons were emitted at all
when the frequency of the incident light was smaller than a certain
minimum value, called the threshold frequency. This minimum frequency
depends on the nature of the material of the emitter plate.

It was found that certain metals like zinc, cadmium, magnesium, etc.,
responded only to ultraviolet light, having short wavelength, to cause
electron emission from the surface. However, some alkali metals such as
lithium, sodium, potassium, caesium and rubidium were sensitive
even to visible light. All these photosensitive substances emit electrons
when they are illuminated by light. After the discovery of electrons, these
electrons were termed as photoelectrons. The phenomenon is called
photoelectric effect.

11.4 EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF PHOTOELECTRIC
EFFECT

Figure 1 1.1 depicts a schematic view of the arrangement used for the
experimental study of the photoelectric effect. It consists of an evacuated
glass / quartz tube having a photosensitive plate C and another metal
plate A. Monochromatic light from the source S of sufficiently short
wavelength passes through the window W and falls on the photosensitive
plate C (emitter). A transparent quartz window is sealed on to the glass
tube, which permits ultraviolet radiation to pass through it and irradiate
the photosensitive plate C. The electrons are emitted by the plate C and
are collected by the plate A (collector), by the electric field created by the
battery. The battery maintains the potential difference between the plates
C and A, that can be varied. The polarity of the plates C and A can be
reversed by a commutator. Thus, the plate A can be maintained at a desired
positive or negative potential with respect to emitter C. When the collector
plate A is positive with respect to the emitter plate C, the electrons are

2019-20

|LU1L|’SI)lSAqd/SDQl0Jd/9]!S/PD‘SA3>1’MMM/ﬂduq

 

L”.
E
E
a;
(D
"U
(D
:1.
E
(D
5
ﬁ
0
:5
"U
3‘
O
H
O
a
(D
9.
E.
O
9.,
Ft?
0
PP

389