458

l Physics

I‘.
CO
H
3
E
If]

 

 

 

Example 13.7 Answer the following questions:

(a)

(b)

(C)

Are the equations of nuclear reactions (such as those given in
Section 13.7) ‘balanced’ in the sense a chemical equation (e.g.,
2H2 + 02—) 2 H20) is? If not, in what sense are they balanced on
both sides?

If both the number of protons and the number of neutrons are
conserved in each nuclear reaction, in what way is mass converted
into energy (or vice-versa) in a nuclear reaction?

A general impression exists that mass-energy interconversion
takes place only in nuclear reaction and never in chemical
reaction. This is strictly speaking, incorrect. Explain.

Solution

(a)

(b)

(C)

A chemical equation is balanced in the sense that the number of
atoms of each element is the same on both sides of the equation.
A chemical reaction merely alters the original combinations of
atoms. In a nuclear reaction, elements may be transmuted. Thus,
the number of atoms of each element is not necessarily conserved
in a nuclear reaction. However, the number of protons and the
number of neutrons are both separately conserved in a nuclear
reaction. [Actually, even this is not strictly true in the realm of
very high energies — what is strictly conserved is the total charge
and total ‘baryon number’. We need not pursue this matter here.)

In nuclear reactions (e. g., Eq. 13.26), the number of protons and
the number of neutrons are the same on the two sides of the equation.

We know that the binding energy of a nucleus gives a negative
contribution to the mass of the nucleus (mass defect). Now, since
proton number and neutron number are conserved in a nuclear
reaction, the total rest mass of neutrons and protons is the same
on either side of a reaction. But the total binding energy of nuclei
on the left side need not be the same as that on the right hand
side. The difference in these binding energies appears as energy
released or absorbed in a nuclear reaction. Since binding energy
contributes to mass, we say that the difference in the total mass
of nuclei on the two sides get converted into energy or vice-versa.
It is in these sense that a nuclear reaction is an example of mass-
energy interconversion.

From the point of view of mass-energy interconversion, a chemical
reaction is similar to a nuclear reaction in principle. The energy
released or absorbed in a chemical reaction can be traced to the
difference in chemical (not nuclear) binding energies of atoms and
molecules on the two sides of a reaction. Since, strictly speaking,
chemical binding energy also gives a negative contribution (mass
defect) to the total mass of an atom or molecule, we can equally
well say that the difference in the total mass of atoms or molecules,
on the two sides of the chemical reaction gets converted into energr
or vice-versa. However, the mass defects involved in a chemical
reaction are almost a million times smaller than those in a nuclear
reaction.This is the reason for the general impression, (which is
incorrect) that mass-energy interconversion does not take place
in a chemical reaction.

2019-20