magnets can be made in a variety of ways. One can hold an
iron rod in the north-south direction and hammer it repeatedly.
The method is illustrated in Fig. 5.1 5. The illustration is from
a 400 year old book to emphasise that the making of
permanent magnets is an old art. One can also hold a steel
rod and stroke it with one end of a bar magnet a large number
of times, always in the same sense to make a permanent
magnet.

An efficient way to make a permanent magnet is to place a
ferromagnetic rod in a solenoid and pass a current. The
magnetic ﬁeld of the solenoid magnetises the rod.

The hysteresis curve (Fig. 5.14) allows us to select suitable
materials for permanent magnets. The material should have

 

FIGURE 5.15 A blacksmith

forging a pemiancnt magnet by
striking a red~hot rod of iron

kept in the nortlrsouth high retentivity so that the magnet is strong and high coercivity
direction with a hammer. The so that the magnetisation is not erased by stray magnetic ﬁelds,
sketch is recreated from an temperature ﬂuctuations or minor mechanical damage.
illustration in De Magnete. a Further, the material should have a high permeability. Steel is
work PllbliSth in 1600 and one-favoured choice. It has a slightly smaller retentivity than
amhored by William Gilben' soft iron but this is outweighed by the much smaller coercivity

the court physician to Queen

of soft iron. Other suitable materials for permanent magnets
Elizabeth of England.

are alnico, cobalt steel and ticonal.

Core of electromagnets are made of ferromagnetic materials
which have high permeability and low retentivity. Soft iron is a suitable
material for electromagnets. On placing a soft iron rod in a solenoid and
passing a current, we increase the magnetism of the solenoid by a
thousand fold. When we switch off the solenoid current, the magnetism is
effectively switched off since the soft iron core has a low retentivity. The
arrangement is shown in Fig. 5.16.

 

 

 

1.3.
E.E :_ \ \ '-\ . »\ \ \“I 2'

i
.2 5 WWW
u—IF: " lucv
“gas
a;
Z;
we
(6}
6.9
SE

 

Ill! <~>

PHEQZCS FIGURE 5.16 A soft iron core in solenoid acts as an electromagnet.

In certain applications, the material goes through an ac cycle of
magnetisation for a long period. This is the case in transformer cores and
telephone diaphragms. The hysteresis curve of such materials must be
narrow. The energy dissipated and the heating will consequently be small.
The material must have a high resistivity to lower eddy current losses.
You will study about eddy currents in Chapter 6.

Electromagnets are used in electric bells, loudspeakers and telephone
diaphragms. Giant electromagnets are used in cranes to lift machinery,

196 and bulk quantities of iron and steel.

2019-20