124

i Physics

EXAMPLE 3. 10

 

Substituting for R1, we have a

01‘

1.

2V R0 ><R

 

V1: R R X 2R
+
L +R0 R0
R0+2R
“22$
2R+R0+2R
V1=2£
R0+4R’
SUMMARY

Current through a given area of a conductor is the net charge passing
per unit time through the area.

To maintain a steady current, we must have a closed circuit in which
an external agency moves electric charge from lower to higher potential
energy. The work done per unit charge by the source in taking the
charge from lower to higher potential energy (i.e., from one terminal
of the source to the other) is called the electromotive force, or emf, of
the source. Note that the emf is not a force; it is the voltage difference
between the two terminals of a source in open circuit.

Ohm’s law: The electric current I ﬂowing through a substance is
proportional to the voltage V across its ends, i.e., V o< I or V = RI,
where R is called the resistance of the substance. The unit of resistance
is ohm: 1:2 = 1 VA'l.

The resistance R of a conductor depends on its length l and
cross—sectional area A through the relation,

R=P_l
A

where p, called resistivity is a property of the material and depends on
temperature and pressure.

Electrical resistivity of substances varies over a very wide range. Metals
have low resistivity, in the range of 10”8 Q m to 10‘6 Q m. Insulators
like glass and rubber have 1022 to 1024 times greater resistivity.
Semiconductors like Si and Ge lie roughly in the middle range of
resistivity on a logarithmic scale.

In most substances, the carriers of current are electrons; in some
cases, for example, ionic crystals and electrolytic liquids, positive and
negative ions carry the electric current.

Current density j gives the amount of charge ﬂowing per second per
unit area normal to the ﬂow,

j=nqu

where n is the number density [number per unit volume) of charge
carriers each of charge q, and 11d is the drift velocity of the charge
carriers. For electrons q = — e. If j is normal to a cross—sectional area
A and is constant over the area, the magnitude of the current I through
the area is nevd A.

2019-20