The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by

where m is the mass of the substance and AQ is the heat required to change its
temperature by AT. The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by

0:139
,u AT

where u is the number of moles of the substance. For a solid, the law of equipartition
of energy gives
C = 3 R

which generally agrees with experiment at ordinary temperatures.

Calorie is the old unit of heat. 1 calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 °C to 15.5 °C. 1 cal = 4.186 J.

For an ideal gas, the molar specific heat capacities at constant pressure and volume
satisfy the relation
Cp — CL, = R

where R is the universal gas constant.

Equilibrium states of a thermodynamic system are described by state variables. The
value of a state variable depends only on the particular state, not on the path used to
arrive at that state. Examples of state variables are pressure (P), volume (V), temperature
(T), and mass (m). Heat and work are not state variables. An Equation of State (like
the ideal gas equation PV = ,u RT) is a relation connecting different state variables.

A quasi—static process is an infinitely slow process such that the system remains in
thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the surroundings throughout. In a
quasi—static process, the pressure and temperature of the environment can differ from
those of the system only infinitesimally.

In an isothermal expansion of an ideal gas from volume V1 to V2 at temperature Tthe
heat absorbed (Q) equals the work done (W) by the gas, each given by

[V21
Q— — [.LRT ln V1,

In an adiabatic process of an ideal gas
PV 7 = constant
where

Work done by an ideal gas in an adiabatic change of state from (P1, V1, T1) to (P2, V2, T2)
is

WzyRm—n)
y»1

. Heat engine is a device in which a system undergoes a cyclic process resulting in
conversion of heat into work. If Q1 is the heat absorbed from the source, Q2 is the heat
released to the sink, and the work output in one cycle is W. the efficiency 11 of the engine
is: