i Physics

 

The derivation of Eqs. (12.1 7) — (12.19) involves the assumption that
the electronic orbits are circular, though orbits under inverse square
force are, in general elliptical. (Planets move in elliptical orbits under the
inverse square gravitational force of the sun.) However, it was shown by
the German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld (1868 — 195 1) that, when the
restriction of circular orbit is relaxed, these equations continue to hold
even for elliptic orbits.

ORBIT VS STATE (ORBITAL PICTURE) OF ELECTRON IN ATOM

We are introduced to the Bohr Model of atom one time or the other in the course of
physics. This model has its place in the history of quantum mechanics and particularly
in explaining the structure of an atom. It has become a milestone since Bohr introduced
the revolutionary idea of definite energy orbits for the electrons, contrary to the classical
picture requiring an accelerating particle to radiate. Bohr also introduced the idea of
quantisation of angular momentum of electrons moving in definite orbits. Thus it was a
semi-classical picture of the structure of atom.

Now with the development of quantum mechanics, we have a better understanding
of the structure of atom. Solutions of the Schrodinger wave equation assign a wave-like
description to the electrons bound in an atom due to attractive forces of the protons.

An orbit of the electron in the Bohr model is the circular path of motion of an electron
around the nucleus. But according to quantum mechanics, we cannot associate a deﬁnite
path with the motion of the electrons in an atom. We can only talk about the probability
of finding an electron in a certain region of space around the nucleus. This probability
can be inferred from the one-electron wave function called the orbital. This function
depends only on the coordinates of the electron.

It is therefore essential that we understand the subtle differences that em'st in the two
models:

0 Bohr model is valid for only one-electron atoms / ions; an energy value, assigned to
each orbit, depends on the principal quantum number n in this model. We know
that energy associated with a stationary state of an electron depends on n only, for
one-electron atoms / ions. For a multi-electron atom / ion, this is not true.

0 The solution of the Schrodinger wave equation, obtained for hydrogen-like atoms /
ions, called the wave function, gives information about the probability of ﬁnding an
electron in various regions around the nucleus. This orbital has no resemblance
whatsoever with the orbit defined for an electron in the Bohr model.

Example 12.5 A 10 kg satellite circles earth once every 2 h in an
orbit having a radius of 8000 km. Assuming that Bohr’s angular
momentum postulate applies to satellites just as it does to an electron

From Eq. (12.13), we have
m u" rn = nh/21t

In

N’ in the hydrogen atom, find the quantum number of the orbit of the
"‘ satellite.

3

5 Solution

It}

426

2019-20