i Physics

Region of
strong ﬁeld

FIGURE 1.16 Dependence of
electric field strength on the
distance and its relation to the

   

Region Of It is the relative density of lines in different regions which is
weak ﬁeld important.

We draw the ﬁgure on the plane of paper, i.e., in two-
dimensions but we live in three-dimensions. So if one wishes
to estimate the density of ﬁeld lines, one has to consider the
number of lines per unit cross-sectional area, perpendicular
to the lines. Since the electric ﬁeld decreases as the square of
the distance from a point charge and the area enclosing the
charge increases as the square of the distance, the number
of ﬁeld lines crossing the enclosing area remains constant,
whatever may be the distance of the area from the charge.

We started by saying that the field lines carry information
about the direction of electric ﬁeld at different points in space.
Having drawn a certain set of field lines, the relative density
(i.e., closeness) of the ﬁeld lines at different points indicates

number of ﬁeld lines. the relative strength of electric ﬁeld at those points. The ﬁeld

24

lines crowd where the ﬁeld is strong and are spaced apart
where it is weak. Figure 1.16 shows a set of ﬁeld lines. We
can imagine two equal and small elements of area placed at points R and
S normal to the ﬁeld lines there. The number of field lines in our picture
cutting the area elements is proportional to the magnitude of field at
these points. The picture shows that the ﬁeld at R is stronger than at S.

To understand the dependence of the ﬁeld lines on the area, or rather
the solid angle subtended by an area element, let us try to relate the
area with the solid angle, a generalisation of angle to three dimensions.
Recall how a (plane) angle is defined in two-dimensions. Let a small
transverse line element Al be placed at a distance r from a point 0. Then
the angle subtended by Al at O can be approximated as A9 = Al/ r.
Likewise, in three-dimensions the solid angle* subtended by a small
perpendicular plane area AS, at a distance r, can be written as
A52 = AS/ r2. We know that in a given solid angle the number of radial
field lines is the same. In Fig. 1.16, for two points P1 and P2 at distances
r1 and r2 from the charge, the element of area subtending the solid angle
A52 is 132A52 at P1 and an element of area r22A52 at P2, respectively. The
number of lines (say n) cutting these area elements are the same. The
number of ﬁeld lines, cutting unit area element is therefore n/ ( r12 A52) at
P1 and n/(r22 A52) at P2, respectively. Since n and A52 are common, the
strength of the field clearly has a 1 / r2 dependence.

The picture of ﬁeld lines was invented by Faraday to develop an
intuitive non-mathematical way of visualising electric ﬁelds around
charged configurations. Faraday called them lines of force. This term is
somewhat misleading, especially in case of magnetic ﬁelds. The more
appropriate term is field lines (electric or magnetic) that we have
adopted in this book.

Electric ﬁeld lines are thus a way of pictorially mapping the electric
ﬁeld around a conﬁguration of charges. An electric ﬁeld line is, in general,

* Solid angle is a measure of a cone. Consider the intersection of the given cone
with a sphere of radius R. The solid angle A52 of the cone is defined to be equal
to AS/Rz, where AS is the area on the sphere cut out by the cone.

2019-20