346

 

l Physics

 

(b) What is the answer if there is no outer covering of the pipe?
9.18 Answer the following questions:

(a) You have learnt that plane and convex mirrors produce virtual
images of objects. Can they produce real images under some
circumstances? Explain.

(b) A virtual image, we always say, cannot be caught on a screen.
Yet when we ‘see’ a virtual image, we are obviously bringing it
on to the ‘screen’ (i.e., the retina) of our eye. Is there a
contradiction?

(c) A diver under water, looks obliquely at a fisherman standing on
the bank of a lake. Would the fisherman look taller or shorter to
the diver than what he actually is?

(d) Does the apparent depth of a tank of water change if viewed
obliquely? If so, does the apparent depth increase or decrease?

(e) The refractive index of diamond is much greater than that of
ordinary glass. Is this fact of some use to a diamond cutter?

9. 19 The image of a small electric bulb fixed on the wall of a room is to be
obtained on the opposite wall 3m away by means of a large convex
lens. What is the maximum possible focal length of the lens required
for the purpose?

9.20 A screen is placed 90 cm from an object. The image of the object on
the screen is formed by a convex lens at two different locations
separated by 20cm. Determine the focal length of the lens.

9.21 (a) Determine the ‘effective focal length’ of the combination of the
two lenses in Exercise 9.10, if they are placed 8.0cm apart with
their principal axes coincident. Does the answer depend on
which side of the combination a beam of parallel light is incident?
Is the notion of effective focal length of this system useful at all?

(b) An object 1.5 cm in size is placed on the side of the convex lens
in the arrangement (a) above. The distance between the object
and the convex lens is 40cm. Determine the magnification
produced by the two-lens system, and the size of the image.

9.22 At what angle should a ray of light be incident on the face of a prism
of refracting angle 60° so that it just suffers total internal reﬂection
at the other face? The refractive index of the material of the prism is
1.524.

9.23 A card sheet divided into squares each of size 1 mm2 is being viewed
at a distance of 9 cm through a magnifying glass (a converging lens
of focal length 9 cm) held close to the eye.

(a) What is the magnification produced by the lens? How much is
the area of each square in the virtual image?

(b) What is the angular magnification (magnifying power) of the
lens?

(c) Is the magnification in (a) equal to the magnifying power in (b)?
Explain.

2019-20