l Physics

 

oscillators, which take up the frequency of the external agency ﬂight)
causing forced oscillations. The frequency of light emitted by a charged
oscillator equals its frequency of oscillation. Thus, the frequency of
scattered light equals the frequency of incident light.

(b) No. Energy carried by a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave, not on the speed of wave propagation.

(c) For a given frequency, intensity of light in the photon picture is
determined by the number of photons crossing an unit area per
unit time.

{ 10.4 COHERENT AND INCOHERENT ADDITION OF WAVES

In this section we will discuss the interference pattern produced by
the superposition of two waves. You may recall that we had discussed
the superposition principle in Chapter 15 of your Class XI textbook.
Indeed the entire field of interference is based on the superposition
principle according to which at a particular point in the medium, the
resultant displacement produced by a number of waves is the vector
sum of the displacements produced by each of the waves.
Consider two needles S1 and S2 moving periodically up and down
in an identical fashion in a trough of water [Fig 1 O.8(a)]. They produce
two water waves, and at a particular point, the phase difference between
the displacements produced by each of the waves does not change
with time; when this happens the two sources are said to be coherent.
Figure 10.8(b) shows the position of crests (solid circles) and troughs
(dashed circles) at a given instant of time. Consider a point P for which

S1 P = S2 P
Since the distances S1 P and S2 P are equal, waves from S1 and 82
will take the same time to travel to the point P and waves that emanate

from S1 and S2 in phase will also arrive, at the point P, in phase.

Thus, if the displacement produced by the source S1 at the point P
FIGURE 10.8 (a) Two is given by

needles oscillating in

phase in water
represent two coherent then, the displacement produced by the source 82 (at the point P) will
sources. also be given by
(b) The pattern of

displacement of water

 

y1 = acos wt

y2 = acos wt

molecmes at an Thus, the resultant of displacement at P would be given by
instant on the surface
of water showing nodal y = H1 + U2 = 2 a COS wt

N (no displacement)

. Since the intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude,
and antmodal A

the resultant intensity will be given by

(maximum
displacement) lines. I = 4 10
where IO represents the intensity produced by each one of the individual
sources; I0 is proportional to a2. In fact at any point on the perpendicular
360 bisector of 8182, the intensity will be 410. The two sources are said to

2019-20