94

PHYSICS

 

this hurts.The conclusion is clear: force not
only depends on the change in momentum,
but also on how fast the change is brought
about. The same change in momentum
brought about in a shorter time needs a
greater applied force. In short, the greater the
rate of change of momentum, the greater is
the force.

 

Fig. 5.3 Force not only depends on the change in
momentum but also on how fast the change
is brought about. A seasoned cricketer draws
in his hands during a catch, allowing greater
time for the ball to stop and hence requires a
smaller force.

' Observations confirm that the product of
mass and velocity (i.e. momentum) is basic to
the effect of force on motion. Suppose a fixed
force is applied for a certain interval of time
on two bodies of different masses, initially at
rest, the lighter body picks up a greater speed
than the heavier body. However, at the end of
the time interval, observations show that each
body acquires the same momentum. Thus
the same force for the same time causes
the same change in momentum for
different bodies. This is a crucial clue to the
second law of motion.

' In the preceding observations, the vector
character of momentum has not been evident.
In the examples so far, momentum and change
in momentum both have the same direction.
But this is not always the case. Suppose a
stone is rotated with uniform speed in a
horizontal plane by means of a string, the
magnitude of momentum is fixed, but its
direction changes (Fig. 5.4). A force is needed
to cause this change in momentum vector.

2019-20

This force is provided by our hand through
the string. Experience suggests that our hand
needs to exert a greater force if the stone is
rotated at greater speed or in a circle of
smaller radius, or both. This corresponds to
greater acceleration or equivalently a greater
rate of change in momentum vector. This
suggests that the greater the rate of change
in momentum vector the greater is the force
applied.

 

Fig. 5.4 Force is necessary for changing the direction
of momentum, even if its magnitude is
constant. We can feel this while rotating a
stone in a horizontal circle with unifomi speed
by means of a string.

These qualitative observations lead to the
second law of motion expressed by Newton as
follows:

The rate of change of momentum of a body is
directly proportional to the applied force and
takes place in the direction in which the force
acts.

Thus, if under the action of a force F for time
interval At, the velocity of a body of mass m
changes from v to v + Av i.e. its initial momentum

p = m v changes by Ap = mAv . According to the
Second Law,

Focﬂ or F =kA—P
At At

where k is a constant of proportionality. Taking

the limit At —> O, the term ﬂ becomes the

At
derivative or differential co-efficient of p with

respect to t, denoted by % . Thus