Magnetism and
Mo’r’rer

 

We begin our study by examining iron ﬁlings sprinkled on a sheet of
glass placed over a short bar magnet. The arrangement of iron ﬁlings is
shown in Fig. 5.2.

The pattern of iron ﬁlings suggests that the magnet has two poles
similar to the positive and negative charge of an electric dipole. As
mentioned in the introductory section, one pole is designated the North
pole and the other, the South pole. When suspended freely, these poles
point approximately towards the geographic north and south poles,

respectively. A similar pattern of iron ﬁlings is observed around a current _ ‘

carrying solenoid.

5.2. 1 The magnetic field lines

The pattern of iron ﬁlings permits us to plot the magnetic ﬁeld lines*. This is
shown both for the bar-magnet and the current-carrying solenoid in
Fig. 5.3. For comparison refer to the Chapter 1, Figure 1. 1 7(d). Electric ﬁeld
lines of an electric dipole are also displayed in Fig. 5.3(c). The magnetic ﬁeld
lines are a Visual and intuitive realisation of the magnetic ﬁeld. Their
properties are:

(i) The magnetic ﬁeld lines of a magnet (or a solenoid) form continuous
closed loops. This is unlike the electric dipole where these ﬁeld lines
begin from a positive charge and end on the negative charge or escape
to inﬁnity.

(ii) The tangent to the ﬁeld line at a given point represents the direction of
the net magnetic ﬁeld B at that point.

Axis

  
    

  

   

‘\\“"II"

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) (b)

 

 

FIGURE 5.2 The
arrangement of iron
filings surrounding a

bar magnet. The

pattern mimics
magnetic ﬁeld lines.
The pattern suggests
that the bar magnet
is a magnetic dipole.

FIGURE 5.3 The field lines of (a) a bar magnet. (b) a current—carrying finite solenoid and
(c) electric dipole. At large distances, the field lines are very similar. The curves

labelled CD and @are closed Gaussian surfaces.

* In some textbooks the magnetic field lines are called magnetic lines of force.
This nomenclature is avoided since it can be confusing. Unlike electrostatics
the field lines in magnetism do not indicate the direction of the force on a
(moving) charge.

2019-20

175