Electric Charges
and Fields

where n is any integer, positive or negative. This basic unit of charge is the
charge that an electron or proton carries. By convention, the charge on an
electron is taken to be negative; therefore charge on an electron is written
as —e and that on a proton as +e.

The fact that electric charge is always an integral multiple of e is termed
as quantisation of charge. There are a large number of situations in physics
where certain physical quantities are quantised. The quantisation of charge
was first suggested by the experimental laws of electrolysis discovered by
English experimentalist Faraday. It was experimentally demonstrated by
Millikan in l 9 1 2.

In the International System (SI) of Units, a unit of charge is called a
coulomb and is denoted by the symbol C. A coulomb is deﬁned in terms
the unit of the electric current which you are going to learn in a subsequent
chapter. In terms of this definition, one coulomb is the charge ﬂowing
through a wire in 1 s if the current is l A (ampere), (see Chapter 2 of Class
XI, Physics Textbook , Part I). In this system, the value of the basic unit of
charge is

e = 1.602192 x 10—190

Thus, there are about 6 X 1018 electrons in a charge of —1C. In

electrostatics, charges of this large magnitude are seldom encountered
and hence we use smaller units l “C (micro coulomb) = 1043 C or 1 mC
(milli coulomb) = 10—3 c.

If the protons and electrons are the only basic charges in the universe,
all the observable charges have to be integral multiples of e. Thus, if a
body contains n1 electrons and n2 protons, the total amount of charge on
the body is n2 X e + n1 X (—e) = (n2 — n1) e. Since n1 and n2 are integers, their
difference is also an integer. Thus the charge on any body is always an
integral multiple of e and can be increased or decreased also in steps of e.

The step size e is, however, very small because at the macroscopic
level, we deal with charges of a few ”C. At this scale the fact that charge of
a body can increase or decrease in units of e is not visible. In this respect,
the grainy nature of the charge is lost and it appears to be continuous.

This situation can be compared with the geometrical concepts of points
and lines. A dotted line viewed from a distance appears continuous to
us but is not continuous in reality. As many points very close to
each other normally give an impression of a continuous line, many
small charges taken together appear as a continuous charge
distribution.

At the macroscopic level, one deals with charges that are enormous
compared to the magnitude of charge e. Since e = 1.6 X 10‘19 C, a charge
of magnitude, say l ”C, contains something like 1013 times the electronic
charge. At this scale, the fact that charge can increase or decrease only in
units of e is not very different from saying that charge can take continuous
values. Thus, at the macroscopic level, the quantisation of charge has no
practical consequence and can be ignored. However, at the microscopic
level, where the charges involved are of the order of a few tens or hundreds
of e, i.e., they can be counted, they appear in discrete lumps and

2019-20