of a charge in a magnetic field, the magnetic force is
perpendicular to the velocity of the particle. So no work is done
and no change in the magnitude of the velocity is produced
(though the direction of momentum may be changed). [Notice
that this is unlike the force due to an electric ﬁeld, qE, which
can have a component parallel (or antiparallel) to motion and
thus can transfer energy in addition to momentum.]

We shall consider motion of a charged particle in a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld. First consider the case of v perpendicular to B.
The perpendicular force, q v X B, acts as a centripetal force and
produces a circular motion perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld.
The particle will describe a circle if v and B are perpendicular
x x x x to each other (Fig. 4.5).

If velocity has a component along B, this component
remains unchanged as the motion along the magnetic ﬁeld will
not be aifected by the magnetic ﬁeld. The motion
in a plane perpendicular to B is as before a
circular one, thereby producing a helical motion
(Fig. 4.6).

You have already learnt in earlier classes
(See Class XI, Chapter 4) that if r is the radius
of the circular path of a particle, then a force of
m U2 / r, acts perpendicular to the path towards
the centre of the circle, and is called the
centripetal force. If the velocity v is
perpendicular to the magnetic field B, the
magnetic force is perpendicular to both v and
B and acts like a centripetal force. It has a
magnitude q u B. Equating the two expressions
for centripetal force,

 

FIGURE 4.5 Circular motion

m v2/r= q u B, which gives

 

radius r = m U / qB (4.5)

FIGURE 4.6 Helical motion for the radius of the circle described by the
charged particle. The larger the momentum,
the larger is the radius and bigger the circle described. If wis the angular

frequency, then u = a) r. So,

a) = 2n v= qB/ m [4.6(a)]
which is independent of the velocity or energy . Here v is the frequency of
rotation. The independence of v from energy has important application
in the design of a cyclotron (see Section 4.4.2).

The time taken for one revolution is T: 27t/a) E l /v. If there is a
component of the velocity parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld (denoted by u”), it
will make the particle move along the ﬁeld and the path of the particle
would be a helical one (Fig. 4.6). The distance moved along the magnetic
field in one rotation is called pitch p. Using Eq. [4.6 (a)], we have

p= UHT = 21tm v” / qB [4.6(b)]
138 The radius of the circular component of motion is called the radius of
the helix.

2019-20