Current
Electricity
E l=jp l
or, E =jp (3.1 1)

The above relation for magnitudes E and j can indeed be cast in a
vector form. The current density, (which we have deﬁned as the current
through unit area normal to the current) is also directed along E, and is
also a vector j (a j E / E). Thus, the last equation can be written as,

E=jp (3.12)

or, j = (SE (3.13)

where 6 El / p is called the conductivity. Ohm’s law is often stated in an
equivalent form, Eq. (3.13) in addition to Eq.(3.3). In the next section, we
will try to understand the origin of the Ohm’s law as arising from the
characteristics of the drift of electrons.

3.5 DRIFT 0F ELECTRONS AND THE ORIGIN
OF RESISTIVITY

As remarked before, an electron will suffer collisions with the heavy ﬁxed
ions, but after collision, it will emerge with the same speed but in random
directions. If we consider all the electrons, their average velocity will be
zero since their directions are random. Thus, if there are N electrons and
the velocity of the ith electron (i = l, 2, 3, N) at a given time is vi, then

1 N
ﬁgvﬁo (3.14)

Consider now the situation when an electric field is

present. Electrons will be accelerated due to this
ﬁeld by

-eE

a = _
m

where -e is the charge and m is the mass of an electron.
Consider again the ith electron at a given time t. This
electron would have had its last collision some time
before t, and let ti be the time elapsed after its last
collision. If vi was its velocity immediately after the last
collision, then its velocity Vi at time tis

(3.15)

 

Vizvi + f t, (3.16) A
since starting with its last collision it was accelerated FIGURE? 3'3 A .SChcinatlc plclure Of
, , , , an electi on 1nov1ng f1 om a pomt A to
(Fig. 3.3) With an acceleration given by Eq. (3.15) for a another point B through repeated
time interval ti. The average velocity of the electrons at collisions, and straight line travel
time t is the average of all the Vi’s. The average of vi’s is between comsions (full (mes). If an
zero [Eq. (3.14)] since immediately after any collision, electric field is applied as shown. the
the direction of the velocity of an electron is completely electron ends up at point B’ (dotted
random. The collisions of the electrons do not occur at 111165) A Slight drift in 3 direction
regular intervals but at random times. Let us denote by O131DOSite the 6190““ field is “Sible-
T, the average time between successive collisions. Then 97

at a given time, some of the electrons would have spent

2019-20