176

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

PHYSICS

The vector or cross product of two vector 3 and b is a vector written as axb. The
magnitude of this vector is absine and its direction is given by the right handed screw
or the right hand rule.

The linear velocity of a particle of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis is given by
v = 0) x r, where r is the position vector of the particle with respect to an origin along
the fixed axis. The relation applies even to more general rotation of a rigid body with
one point fixed. In that case r is the position vector of the particle with respect to the
fixed point taken as the origin.

The centre of mass of a system of n particles is defined as the point whose position
vector is

R : Emil}
M

Velocity of the centre of mass of a system of particles is given by V = P/ M, where P is the
linear momentum of the system. The centre of mass moves as if all the mass of the
system is concentrated at this point and all the extemal forces act at it. If the total
external force on the system is zero, then the total linear momentum of the system is
constant.

The angular momentum of a system of n particles about the origin is

L : irixpi
i=1

The torque or moment of force on a system of n particles about the origin is

1:21;. ><Fi
1

The force F: acting on the 1‘" particle includes the external as well as internal forces.
Assuming Newton's third law of motion and that forces between any two particles act
along the line joining the particles, we can show cm = 0 and

dL
5 = ‘m
A rigid body is in mechanical equilibrium if
(1) it is in translational equilibrium, i.e. , the total external force on it is zero : 2 Fl. = O ,

and
[2] it is in rotational equilibrium, i.e. the total external torque on it is zero :

£11.: ZrixFi=0.

The centre of gravity of an extended body is that point where the total gravitational
torque on the body is zero.

The moment of intertia of a rigid body about an axis is defined by the formula I = Z mirl.2
where rl is the perpendicular distance of the ith point of the body from the axis. The

1 2
kinetic energy of rotation is K =5 Ia) .

The theorem of parallel axes: I; :12 + Ma2 , allows us to determine the moment of

intertia of a rigid body about an axis as the sum of the moment of inertia of the body
about a parallel axis through its centre of mass and the product of mass and square of
the perpendicular distance between these two axes.

2019-20