468

 

 

l Physics

 

and ﬂow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within the
solid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes /valves, the mobile electrons
were obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to ﬂow in an
evacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated space
is required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consume
low power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.
Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computer
monitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replaced
by Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid state
electronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor devices
was formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Lead
sulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used as
detector of radio waves.

In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts of
semiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices like
junction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a
3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will also
be described.

14.2 CLASSIFICATION OF METALS, CONDUCTORS AND
SEMICONDUCTORS

On the basis of conductivity
On the basis of the relative values of electrical conductivity (6) or resistivity
(p = 1 /o), the solids are broadly classified as:

(i) Metals: They possess very low resistivity (or high conductivity).

p~ 10—2— 10‘89m

a~ 102 — 108 S m-1
(ii) Semiconductors: They have resistivity or conductivity intermediate

to metals and insulators.

p~ 10-5— IOGQm

o~ 105— 10*"3 S m-1
(iii) Insulators: They have high resistivity (or low conductivity).

p ~ 1011 — 1019 O m

6 ~ 10‘11 — 10‘19 S m—1

The values of p and a given above are indicative of magnitude and
could well go outside the ranges as well. Relative values of the resistivity
are not the only criteria for distinguishing metals, insulators and
semiconductors from each other. There are some other differences, which
will become clear as we go along in this chapter.

Our interest in this chapter is in the study of semiconductors which
could be:
(i) Elemental semiconductors: Si and Ge
(ii) Compound semiconductors: Examples are:

0 Inorganic: CdS, GaAs, CdSe, InP, etc.

0 Organic: anthracene, doped pthalocyanines, etc.

0 Organic polymers: polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene, etc.

Most of the currently available semiconductor devices are based on
elemental semiconductors Si or Ge and compound inorganic

2019-20