l Physics

Photosensitive
plate

Quartz

    

_ S attracted to it. The emission of electrons causes ﬂow of

electric current in the circuit. The potential difference
Evacuated between the emitter and collector plates is measured by
glass tube .

a voltmeter (V) whereas the resulting photo current
ﬂowing in the circuit is measured by a microammeter
(HA). The photoelectric current can be increased or
decreased by varying the potential of collector plate A

with respect to the emitter plate C. The intensity and
v / Commutator

frequency of the incident light can be varied, as can the
potential difference V between the emitter C and the
collector A.

We can use the experimental arrangement of
Fig. 1 1.1 to study the variation of photocurrent with

+ r (a) intensity of radiation, (b) frequency of incident

FIGURE 11.1 Experimental radiation, (c) the potential difference between the
arrangement for study of plates A and C, and (d) the nature of the material
photoelectric effect. of plate C. Light of different frequencies can be used

Photoelectric current —>

by putting appropriate coloured filter or coloured
glass in the path of light falling on the emitter C. The intensity
of light is varied by changing the distance of the light source
from the emitter.

1 1.4. 1 Effect of intensity of light on photocurrent

The collector A is maintained at a positive potential with
respect to emitter C so that electrons ejected from C are
attracted towards collector A. Keeping the frequency of the
incident radiation and the potential fixed, the intensity of light
is varied and the resulting photoelectric current is measured
each time. It is found that the photocurrent increases linearly

 

Intensity of light —>

with intensity of incident light as shown graphically in
Fig. 1 1.2. The photocurrent is directly proportional to the

FIGURE 1 1.2 Variation of number of photoelectrons emitted per second. This implies
Photoelectric Current with that the number of photoelectrons emitted per second is
iIItCHSity 0‘ light directly proportional to the intensity of incident radiation.

390

1 1.4.2 Effect of potential on photoelectric current

We ﬁrst keep the plate A at some positive potential with respect to the
plate C and illuminate the plate C with light of fixed frequency v and fixed
intensity 11. We next vary the positive potential of plate A gradually and
measure the resulting photocurrent each time. It is found that the
photoelectric current increases with increase in positive (accelerating)
potential. At some stage, for a certain positive potential of plate A, all the
emitted electrons are collected by the plate A and the photoelectric current
becomes maximum or saturates. If we increase the accelerating potential
of plate A further, the photocurrent does not increase. This maximum
value of the photoelectric current is called saturation current. Saturation
current corresponds to the case when all the photoelectrons emitted by
the emitter plate C reach the collector plate A.

We now apply a negative (retarding) potential to the plate A with respect
to the plate C and make it increasingly negative gradually. When the

2019-20