Electric Charges
and Fields

 

[This happens even when the light object is not a conductor. The
mechanism for how this happens is explained later in Sections 1.10 and
2.1 0.] The centres of the two types of charges are slightly separated. We
know that opposite charges attract while similar charges repel. However,
the magnitude of force depends on the distance between the charges
and in this case the force of attraction overweighs the force of repulsion.
As a result the particles like bits of paper or pith balls, being light, are
pulled towards the rods.

Example 1.1 How can you charge a metal sphere positively Without
touching it?

Solution Figure 1.5(a) shows an uncharged metallic sphere on an
insulating metal stand. Bring a negatively charged rod close to the
metallic sphere, as shown in Fig. 1.5(b). As the rod is brought close
to the sphere, the free electrons in the sphere move away due to
repulsion and start piling up at the farther end. The near end becomes
positively charged due to deﬁcit of electrons. This process of charge
distribution stops when the net force on the free electrons inside the
metal is zero. Connect the sphere to the ground by a conducting
wire. The electrons will ﬂow to the ground while the positive charges
at the near end will remain held there due to the attractive force of
the negative charges on the rod, as shown in Fig. 1.5(c). Disconnect
the sphere from the ground. The positive charge continues to be
held at the near end [Fig. l.5(d)]. Remove the electrified rod. The
positive charge will spread uniformly over the sphere as shown in

Fig. 1.5(e).

 

FIGURE 1 .5

In this experiment, the metal sphere gets charged by the process
of induction and the rod does not lose any of its charge.

Similar steps are involved in charging a metal sphere negatively
by induction, by bringing a positively charged rod near it. In this
case the electrons will ﬂow from the ground to the sphere when the
sphere is connected to the ground with a wire. Can you explain why?

2019-20

I "[ EI’IJWVXEI

’3.

Lup'usig/souuisa/BgpaLLILu/Luoo' LU OQJSSEpSDgSA'LId 'MMM/ﬂdnq

:uononpui Kq wmsﬁs aiaqu-ozvn 12 611161qu uo uonewiue aAnoeiawI