Students can make a simple electroscope as
+ + * follows [Fig. l .2(b)]: Take a thin aluminium curtain
rod with ball ends fitted for hanging the curtain. Cut
out a piece of length about 20 cm with the ball at
one end and ﬂatten the cut end. Take a large bottle
that can hold this rod and a cork which will fit in the
opening of the bottle. Make a hole in the cork
sufficient to hold the curtain rod snugly. Slide the
rod through the hole in the cork with the cut end on
the lower side and ball end projecting above the cork.
Fold a small, thin aluminium foil (about 6 cm in
length) in the middle and attach it to the ﬂattened
end of the rod by cellulose tape. This forms the leaves
of your electroscope. Fit the cork in the bottle with
about 5 cm of the ball end projecting above the cork.
A paper scale may be put inside the bottle in advance
to measure the separation of leaves. The separation
is a rough measure of the amount of charge on the
electroscope.
To understand how the electroscope works, use
the White paper strips we used for seeing the
(b) attraction of charged bodies. Fold the strips into half
FIGURE 1.2 Electroscopes: (a) The gold leaf ,SO th,at you make a mark Of fold. Open the Strlp and
electroscope. (b) Schematics of a simple iron it lightly With the mountain fold up, as shown
electroscope. in Fig. 1.3. Hold the strip by pinching it at the fold.
You would notice that the two halves move apart.
This shows that the strip has acquired charge on ironing. When you fold
it into half, both the halves have the same charge. Hence they repel each
other. The same effect is seen in the leaf electroscope. On charging the
curtain rod by touching the ball end with an electrified body, charge is
|:| transferred to the curtain rod and the attached aluminium foil. Both the
(a) halves of the foil get similar charge and therefore repel each other. The
divergence in the leaves depends on the amount of charge on them. Let
us first try to understand why material bodies acquire charge.
You know that all matter is made up of atoms and / or molecules.
Although normally the materials are electrically neutral, they do contain
charges; but their charges are exactly balanced. Forces that hold the
(b) molecules together, forces that hold atoms together in a solid, the adhesive
force of glue, forces associated with surface tension, all are basically
electrical in nature, arising from the forces between charged particles.
Thus the electric force is all pervasive and it encompasses almost each
and every field associated with our life. It is therefore essential that we
(C) learn more about such a force.
To electrify a neutral body, we need to add or remove one kind of
FIGURE 1.3 Paper strip charge. When we say that a body is charged, we always refer to this
E‘Xpﬁ'rimem- excess charge or deficit of charge. In solids, some of the electrons, being
less tightly bound in the atom, are the charges which are transferred
from one body to the other. A body can thus be charged positively by
4 losing some of its electrons. Similarly, a body can be charged negatively

 

 

2019-20