Atoms

 

be provided if the greater part of the
mass of the atom and its positive charge
were concentrated tightly at its centre.
Then the incoming oc-particle could get
very close to the positive charge without
penetrating it, and such a close
encounter would result in a large
deﬂection. This agreement supported
the hypothesis of the nuclear atom. This
is why Rutherford is credited with the
discovery of the nucleus.

In Rutherford’s nuclear model of
the atom, the entire positive charge and
most of the mass of the atom are
concentrated in the nucleus with the
electrons some distance away. The

electrons would be moving in orbits
about the nucleus just as the planets FIGURE 12.3 Experimental data points (shown by

do around the sun. Rutherford’s dots) on scattenng oi departicles by a thm {011 at

, d h . f different angles obtained by Geiger and Marsden
eXperlmentS suggeSte t e Slze 0 using the setup shown in Figs. 12.1 and

 

 

 

Number of scattered particles detected

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Scattering angle 9 (in degree]

—15
the nudeus to be about 10 m to 12.2. Rutherford’s nuclear model predicts the solid
10‘14 m. From kinetic theory, the size curve which is seen to be in good agreement with
of an atom was known to be 10‘10 m, eleeriment.

about 10,000 to 100,000 times larger

than the size of the nucleus (see Chapter 1 1, Section 1 1.6 in Class XI
Physics textbook). Thus, the electrons would seem to be at a distance
from the nucleus of about 10,000 to 100,000 times the size of the nucleus
itself. Thus, most of an atom is empty space. With the atom being largely
empty space, it is easy to see why most oc-particles go right through a
thin metal foil. However, when oc-particle happens to come near a nucleus,
the intense electric field there scatters it through a large angle. The atomic
electrons, being so light, do not appreciably affect the oc-particles.

The scattering data shown in Fig. 12.3 can be analysed by employing
Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom. As the gold foil is very thin, it
can be assumed that oc-particles will suffer not more than one scattering
during their passage through it. Therefore, computation of the trajectory
of an alpha-particle scattered by a single nucleus is enough. Alpha-
particles are nuclei of helium atoms and, therefore, carry two units, 2e,
of positive charge and have the mass of the helium atom. The charge of
the gold nucleus is Ze, where Z is the atomic number of the atom; for
gold Z = 79. Since the nucleus of gold is about 50 times heavier than an
oc-particle, it is reasonable to assume that it remains stationary
throughout the scattering process. Under these assumptions, the
trajectory of an alpha-particle can be computed employing Newton’s
second law of motion and the Coulomb’s law for electrostatic
force of repulsion between the alpha-particle and the positively
charged nucleus. 4 1 7

2019-20