i Physics

 

(d)

(6)

FIGURE 1.4 Charging
by induction.

electric current from the power station and the third is earthed by
connecting it to the buried metal plate. Metallic bodies of the electric
appliances such as electric iron, refrigerator, TV are connected to the
earth wire. When any fault occurs or live wire touches the metallic body,
the charge ﬂows to the earth without damaging the appliance and without
causing any injury to the humans; this would have otherwise been
unavoidable since the human body is a conductor of electricity.

1.4 CHARGING BY INDUCTION

When we touch a pith ball with an electriﬁed plastic rod, some of the
negative charges on the rod are transferred to the pith ball and it also
gets charged. Thus the pith ball is charged by contact. It is then repelled
by the plastic rod but is attracted by a glass rod which is oppositely
charged. However, why a electrified rod attracts light objects, is a question
we have still left unanswered. Let us try to understand what could be
happening by performing the following experiment.

(i) Bring two metal spheres, A and B, supported on insulating stands,
in contact as shown in Fig. 1.4(a).

(ii) Bring a positively charged rod near one of the spheres, say A, taking
care that it does not touch the sphere. The free electrons in the spheres
are attracted towards the rod. This leaves an excess of positive charge
on the rear surface of sphere B. Both kinds of charges are bound in
the metal spheres and cannot escape. They, therefore, reside on the
surfaces, as shown in Fig. 1.4(b). The left surface of sphere A, has an
excess of negative charge and the right surface of sphere B, has an
excess of positive charge. However, not all of the electrons in the spheres
have accumulated on the left surface of A. As the negative charge
starts building up at the left surface of A, other electrons are repelled
by these. In a short time, equilibrium is reached under the action of
force of attraction of the rod and the force of repulsion due to the
accumulated charges. Fig. 1.4(b) shows the equilibrium situation.
The process is called induction of charge and happens almost
instantly. The accumulated charges remain on the surface, as shown,
till the glass rod is held near the sphere. If the rod is removed, the
charges are not acted by any outside force and they redistribute to
their original neutral state.

(iii) Separate the spheres by a small distance while the glass rod is still
held near sphere A, as shown in Fig. 1.4(c). The two spheres are found
to be oppositely charged and attract each other.

(iv) Remove the rod. The charges on spheres rearrange themselves as
shown in Fig. 1.4(d). Now, separate the spheres quite apart. The
charges on them get uniformly distributed over them, as shown in
Fig. 1.4(e).

In this process, the metal spheres will each be equal and oppositely
charged. This is charging by induction. The positively charged glass rod
does not lose any of its charge, contrary to the process of charging by
contact.

When electrified rods are brought near light objects, a similar effect
takes place. The rods induce opposite charges on the near surfaces of
the objects and similar charges move to the farther side of the object.

2019-20