i Physics

The formulation of Bohr model involves electrical force between
positively charged nucleus and electron. It does not include the
electrical forces between electrons which necessarily appear in
multi-electron atoms.

(ii) While the Bohr’s model correctly predicts the frequencies of the light
emitted by hydrogenic atoms, the model is unable to explain the
relative intensities of the frequencies in the spectrum. In emission
spectrum of hydrogen, some of the visible frequencies have weak
intensity, others strong. Why? Experimental observations depict that
some transitions are more favoured than others. Bohr’s model is
unable to account for the intensity variations.

Bohr’s model presents an elegant picture of an atom and cannot be

generalised to complex atoms. For complex atoms we have to use a new

and radical theory based on Quantum Mechanics, which provides a more
complete picture of the atomic structure.

LASER LIGHT

Imagine a crowded market place or a railway platform with people entering a gate and
going towards all directions. Their footsteps are random and there is no phase correlation
between them. On the other hand, think of a large number of soldiers in a regulated march.
Their footsteps are very well correlated. See figure here.
This is similar to the difference between light emitted by

an ordinary source like a candle or a bulb and that emitted fﬁﬂwfg;

by a laser. The acronym LASER stands for Light Ampliﬁcation (5 {V33 :5 ,r’

by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Since its development 2:: 5::

in 1960, it has entered into all areas of science and technology. f, ”1 ~13;

It has found applications in physics, chemistry, biology, ‘“ ‘r “
medicine, surgery, engineering, etc. There are low power (a) Light from a bulb
lasers, with a power of 0.5 mW, called pencil lasers, which

serve as pointers. There are also lasers of different power, WWW ”ZZLW
suitable for delicate surgery of eye or glands in the stomach. mm Wﬁ w»
Finally, there are lasers which can cut or weld steel. (b) Laser light

Light is emitted from a source in the form of packets of
waves. Light coming out from an ordinary source contains a mixture of many wavelengths.
There is also no phase relation between the various waves. Therefore, such light, even if it is
passed through an aperture, spreads very fast and the beam size increases rapidly with
distance. In the case of laser light, the wavelength of each packet is almost the same. Also
the average length of the packet of waves is much larger. This means that there is better
phase correlation over a longer duration of time. This results in reducing the divergence of
a laser beam substantially.

If there are N atoms in a source, each emitting light with intensity I, then the total
intensity produced by an ordinary source is proportional to N1, whereas in a laser source,
it is proportional to N21. Considering that N is very large, we see that the light from a laser
can be much stronger than that from an ordinary source.

When astronauts of the Apollo missions visited the moon, they placed a mirror on its
surface, facing the earth. Then scientists on the earth sent a strong laser beam, which was
reﬂected by the mirror on the moon and received back on the earth. The size of the reﬂected
laser beam and the time taken for the round trip were measured. This allowed a very
accurate determination of (a) the extremely small divergence of a laser beam and (b) the
distance of the moon from the earth. ‘

432

2019-20