Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

virtual if the rays do not actually meet but appear

to diverge from the point when produced

backwards. An image is thus a point-to-point
correspondence with the object established
through reﬂection and / or refraction.

In principle, we can take any two rays
emanating from a point on an object, trace their
paths, find their point of intersection and thus,
obtain the image of the point due to reﬂection at a
spherical mirror. In practice, however, it is
convenient to choose any two of the following rays:
(i) The ray from the point which is parallel to the

principal axis. The reﬂected ray goes through

the focus of the mirror.

(ii) The ray passing through the centre of
curvature of a concave mirror or appearing to pass through it for a
convex mirror. The reﬂected ray simply retraces the path.

(iii) The ray passing through (or directed towards) the focus of the concave
mirror or appearing to pass through (or directed towards) the focus
of a convex mirror. The reﬂected ray is parallel to the principal axis.

(iv) The ray incident at any angle at the pole. The reﬂected ray follows
laws of reﬂection.

Figure 9.5 shows the ray diagram considering three rays. It shows
the image A’B’ (in this case, real) of an object AB formed by a concave
mirror. It does not mean that only three rays emanate from the point A.
An infinite number of rays emanate from any source, in all directions.
Thus, point A’ is image point of A if every ray originating at point A and
falling on the concave mirror after reﬂection passes through the point A’.

We now derive the mirror equation or the relation between the object
distance (u), image distance (D) and the focal length (f).

From Fig. 9.5, the two right-angled triangles A’B’F and MPF are
similar. (For paraxial rays, MP can be considered to be a straight line
perpendicular to CP.) Therefore,

‘B’A’ _ B’F
PM FP

B’A’ _ B’F
BA _ FP

Since A APB = A A’PB’, the right angled triangles A’B’P and ABP are
also similar. Therefore,

 

 

FIGURE 9.5 Ray diagram for image
formation by a concave mirror.

 

 

 

 

or (2' PM = AB) (9.4)

 

 

 

 

B’A’ _ B’P
BA _ BP (9'5)
Comparing Eqs. (9.4) and (9.5), we get
‘B’F B’P—FP B’P
- - (9.6)

FP _ FP _ BP
Equation (9.6) is a relation involving magnitude of distances. We now
apply the sign convention. We note that light travels from the object to

the mirror MPN. Hence this is taken as the positive direction. To reach 313

2019-20