WAV ES

369

 

In solids, similar arguments can be made. In
a crystalline solid, atoms or group of atoms are
arranged in a periodic lattice. In these, each
atom or group of atoms is in equilibrium, due to
forces from the surrounding atoms. Displacing
one atom, keeping the others fixed, leads to
restoring forces, exactly as in a spring. So we
can think of atoms in a lattice as end points,
with springs between pairs of them.

In the subsequent sections of this chapter
we are going to discuss various characteristic
properties of waves.

15.2 TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL
WAVES

We have seen that motion of mechanical waves
involves oscillations of constituents of the
medium. If the constituents of the medium
oscillate perpendicular to the direction of wave
propagation, we call the wave a transverse wave.
If they oscillate along the direction of wave
propagation, we call the wave a longitudinal
wave.

Fig.15.2 shows the propagation of a single
pulse along a string, resulting from a single up
and down jerk. If the string is very long compared

 

Fig. 1 5.2 When a pulse travels along the length of a
stretched string (x—direction), the elements
of the string oscillate up and down (y—
direction)

to the size of the pulse, the pulse will damp out
before it reaches the other end and reﬂection
from that end may be ignored. Fig. 15.3 shows a
similar situation, but this time the external
agent gives a continuous periodic sinusoidal up
and down jerk to one end of the string. The
resulting disturbance on the string is then a
sinusoidal wave. In either case the elements of
the string oscillate about their equilibrium mean

Harmonic —> L x

wave

 

Fig. 1 5.3 A harmonic (sinusoidal) wave travelling
along a stretched string is an example of a
transverse wave. An element of the string
in the region of the wave oscillates about
its equilibrium position perpendicular to the
direction of wave propagation.

position as the pulse or wave passes through
them. The oscillations are normal to the
direction of wave motion along the string, so this
is an example of transverse wave.

We can look at a wave in two ways. We can fix
an instant of time and picture the wave in space.
This will give us the shape of the wave as a
whole in space at a given instant. Another way
is to ﬁx a location i.e. fix our attention on a
particular element of string and see its
oscillatory motion in time.

Fig. 15.4 describes the situation for
longitudinal waves in the most familiar example
of the propagation of sound waves. A long pipe
filled with air has a piston at one end. A single
sudden push forward and pull back of the piston
will generate a pulse of condensations (higher
density) and rarefactions (lower density) in the
medium (air). If the push-pull of the piston is
continuous and periodic (sinusoidal), a

 

Fig. 1 5.4 Longitudinal waves (sound) generated in a
pipe ﬁlled with air by moving the piston up
and down. A volume element of air oscillates
in the direction parallel to the direction of
wave propagation.

2019-20