Electric Charges
and Fields

by gaining electrons. When we rub a glass rod with silk, some of the
electrons from the rod are transferred to the silk cloth. Thus the rod gets
positively charged and the silk gets negatively charged. No new charge is
created in the process of rubbing. Also the number of electrons, that are
transferred, is a very small fraction of the total number of electrons in the
material body. Also only the less tightly bound electrons in a material
body can be transferred from it to another by rubbing. Therefore, when
a body is rubbed with another, the bodies get charged and that is why

we have to stick to certain pairs of materials to notice charging on rubbing
the bodies.

1.3 CONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS

A metal rod held in hand and rubbed with wool will not show any sign of
being charged. However, if a metal rod with a wooden or plastic handle is
rubbed without touching its metal part, it shows signs of charging.
Suppose we connect one end of a copper wire to a neutral pith ball and
the other end to a negatively charged plastic rod. We will find that the
pith ball acquires a negative charge. If a similar experiment is repeated
with a nylon thread or a rubber band, no transfer of charge will take
place from the plastic rod to the pith ball. Why does the transfer of charge
not take place from the rod to the ball?

Some substances readily allow passage of electricity through them,
others do not. Those which allow electricity to pass through them easily
are called conductors. They have electric charges (electrons) that are
comparatively free to move inside the material. Metals, human and animal
bodies and earth are conductors. Most of the non-metals like glass,
porcelain, plastic, nylon, wood offer high resistance to the passage of
electricity through them. They are called insulators. Most substances
fall into one of the two classes stated above*.

When some charge is transferred to a conductor, it readily gets
distributed over the entire surface of the conductor. In contrast, if some
charge is put on an insulator, it stays at the same place. You will learn
why this happens in the next chapter.

This property of the materials tells you why a nylon or plastic comb
gets electrified on combing dry hair or on rubbing, but a metal article
like spoon does not. The charges on metal leak through our body to the
ground as both are conductors of electricity.

When we bring a charged body in contact with the earth, all the
excess charge on the body disappears by causing a momentary current
to pass to the ground through the connecting conductor (such as our
body). This process of sharing the charges with the earth is called
grounding or earthing. Earthing provides a safety measure for electrical
circuits and appliances. A thick metal plate is buried deep into the earth
and thick wires are drawn from this plate; these are used in buildings
for the purpose of earthing near the mains supply. The electric wiring in
our houses has three wires: live, neutral and earth. The first two carry

* There is a third category called semiconductors, which offer resistance to the
movement of charges which is intermediate between the conductors and
insulators.

2019-20