WORK. ENERGY AND POWER

121

 

energy V(x) is deﬁned if the force Rx) can be
written as

_d_V

F(x) 2 dx

This implies that

X] Vf

[dedx = —j dV= V, —Vf
x. W

The work done by a conservative force such as

gravity depends on the initial and final positions

only. In the previous chapter we have worked

on examples dealing with inclined planes. If an

object of mass m is released from rest, from the

top of a smooth (frictionless) inclined plane of

height h, its speed at the bottom

is 29h irrespective of the angle of inclination.

Thus, at the bottom of the inclined plane it
acquires a kinetic energy, mgh. If the work done
or the kinetic energy did depend on other factors
such as the velocity or the particular path taken
by the object, the force would be called non-
conservative.

The dimensions of potential energy are
[MLZT ’2] and the unit is joule (J), the same as
kinetic energy or work. To reiterate, the change
in potential energy, for a conservative force,
AV is equal to the negative of the work done by
the force

AV = — FIX) Ax (6.9)

In the example of the falling ball considered in

this section we saw how potential energy was

converted to kinetic energy. This hints at an

important principle of conservation in mechanics,
which we now proceed to examine.

6.8 THE CONSERVATION 0F MECHANICAL
ENERGY

For simplicity we demonstrate this important
principle for one-dimensional motion. Suppose
that a body undergoes displacement Ax under
the action of a conservative force F. Then from
the WE theorem we have,

AK = Rx) Ax
If the force is conservative, the potential energy
function V(x) can be defined such that

— AV = Rx) Ax
The above equations imply that

AK + AV = O

A(K + V) = O (6.10)

which means that K + V, the sum of the kinetic
and potential energies of the body is a constant.
Over the whole path, xi to X], this means that
K, + V(xi) = Kf + V(xf) (6.1 l)

The quantity K +V(x), is called the total
mechanical energy of the system. Individually
the kinetic energy K and the potential energy
V(x) may vary from point to point, but the sum
is a constant. The aptness of the term
‘conservative force’ is now clear.

Let us consider some of the definitions of a
conservative force.

0 A force FIX) is conservative if it can be derived
from a scalar quantity V(x) by the relation
given by Eq. (6.9). The three-dimensional
generalisation requires the use of a vector
derivative, which is outside the scope of this
book.

0 The work done by the conservative force
depends only on the end points. This can be
seen from the relation,

W = Kf— Ki = V(xi) — V(xf)
which depends on the end points.

0 A third definition states that the work done
by this force in a closed path is zero. This is
once again apparent from Eq. (6.1 1) since
xi = xf_
Thus, the principle of conservation of total

mechanical energy can be stated as

The total mechanical energy of a system is
conserved if the forces, doing work on it, are
conservative.

The above discussion can be made more
concrete by considering the example of the
gravitational force once again and that of the
spring force in the next section. Fig. 6.5 depicts
a ball of mass m being dropped from a cliff of
height H.

 

Fig. 6 .5 The conversion of potential energy to kinetic
energy for a ball of mass m dropped from a

height H.

2019-20