100

i Physics

EXAMPLE 3.2

 

Example 3.2

(a) In Example 3.1, the electron drift speed is estimated to be only a
few mm s‘1 for currents in the range of a few amperes? How then
is current established almost the instant a circuit is closed?

(b) The electron drift arises due to the force experienced by electrons
in the electric field inside the conductor. But force should cause
acceleration. Why then do the electrons acquire a steady average
drift speed?

(c) If the electron drift speed is so small, and the electron’s charge is
small, how can we still obtain large amounts of current in a
conductor?

((1) When electrons drift in a metal from lower to higher potential,
does it mean that all the ‘free’ electrons of the metal are moving
in the same direction?

(e) Are the paths of electrons straight lines between successive
collisions (with the positive ions of the metal) in the (i) absence of
electric field, (ii) presence of electric field?

Solution

(a) Electric field is established throughout the circuit, almost instantly
(with the speed of light) causing at every point a local electron
drift. Establishment of a current does not have to wait for electrons
from one end of the conductor travelling to the other end. However,
it does take a little while for the current to reach its steady value.

(b) Each ‘free’ electron does accelerate, increasing its drift speed until
it collides with a positive ion of the metal. It loses its drift speed
after collision but starts to accelerate and increases its drift speed
again only to suffer a collision again and so on. On the average,
therefore, electrons acquire only a drift speed.

(c) Simple, because the electron number density is enormous,
~1029 m‘S.

(d) By no means. The drift velocity is superposed over the large
random velocities of electrons.

(e) In the absence of electric field, the paths are straight lines; in the

presence of electric field, the paths are, in general, curved.

3.5. 1 Mobility

As we have seen, conductivity arises from mobile charge carriers. In
metals, these mobile charge carriers are electrons; in an ionised gas, they
are electrons and positive charged ions; in an electrolyte, these can be
both positive and negative ions.

An important quantity is the mobility ,u defined as the magnitude of
the drift velocity per unit electric field:

_|Vd|
” E

 

(3.24)

The SI unit of mobility is m2/Vs and is 104 of the mobility in practical
units (cm2/Vs). Mobility is positive. From Eq. (3.1 7), we have

v_etE
'1 m

2019-20