Wave Optics

N 1.22].
_2sin,8

If the medium between the object and the objective lens is not air but
a medium of refractive index n, Eq. (10.29) gets modiﬁed to

1.22/1

d . :—
mm 2nsinﬂ (10.30)

The product n sinB is called the numerical aperture and is sometimes
marked on the objective.

The resolving power of the microscope is given by the reciprocal of
the minimum separation of two points seen as distinct. It can be seen
from Eq. (10.30) that the resolving power can be increased by choosing a
medium of higher refractive index. Usually an oil having a refractive index
close to that of the objective glass is used. Such an arrangement is called
an ‘oil immersion objective’. Notice that it is not possible to make sinB
larger than unity. Thus, we see that the resolving power of a microscope
is basically determined by the wavelength of the light used.

There is a likelihood of confusion between resolution and
magnification, and similarly between the role of a telescope and a
microscope to deal with these parameters. A telescope produces images
of far objects nearer to our eye. Therefore objects which are not resolved
at far distance, can be resolved by looking at them through a telescope.
A microscope, on the other hand, magnifies objects (which are near to
us) and produces their larger image. We may be looking at two stars or
two satellites of a far-away planet, or we may be looking at different
regions of a living cell. In this context, it is good to remember that a
telescope resolves whereas a microscope magnifies.

10.6.4 The validity of ray optics

An aperture (i.e., slit or hole) of size a illuminated by a parallel beam
sends diffracted light into an angle of approximately z A/ a. This is the
angular size of the bright central maximum. In travelling a distance 2,
the diffracted beam therefore acquires a width 21/ a due to diffraction. It
is interesting to ask at what value of z the spreading due to diffraction
becomes comparable to the size a of the aperture. We thus approximately
equate z?» / a with a. This gives the distance beyond which divergence of
the beam of width abecomes significant. Therefore,

 

(10.29)

a2

3:7 (10.31)

We deﬁne a quantity zF called the Fresnel distance by the following
equation

zF : a2 / x1

Equation (10.3 1) shows that for distances much smaller than zF, the
spreading due to diffraction is smaller compared to the size of the beam.

It becomes comparable when the distance is approximately zF. For
distances much greater than 2 , the spreading due to diffraction

2019-20

375