l Physics

 

DETERMINE THE RESOLVING POWER OF YOUR EYE

You can estimate the resolving power of your eye with a simple experiment. Make
black stripes of equal width separated by white stripes; see ﬁgure here. All the black
stripes should be of equal width, while the width of the intermediate white stripes should
increase as you go from the left to the right. For example, let all black stripes have a width
of 5 mm. Let the width of the ﬁrst two white stripes be 0.5 mm each, the next two white
stripes be 1 mm each, the next two 1.5 mm each, etc. Paste this pattern on a wall in a
room or laboratory, at the height of your eye.

Now watch the pattern, preferably with one eye. By moving away or closer to the wall,
ﬁnd the position where you can just see some two black stripes as separate stripes. All
the black stripes to the left of this stripe would merge into one another and would not be
distinguishable. On the other hand, the black stripes to the right of this would be more
and more clearly visible. Note the width d of the white stripe which separates the two
regions, and measure the distance D of the wall from your eye. Then d/ D is the resolution
of your eye.

You have watched specks of dust ﬂoating in air in a sunbeam entering through your
window. Find the distance (of a speck) which you can clearly see and distinguish from a
neighbouring speck. Knowing the resolution of your eye and the distance of the speck,

estimate the size of the speck of dust. ‘

When the separation between two points in a microscopic specimen
is comparable to the wavelength A of the light, the diffraction effects
become important. The image of a point object will again be a diffraction

pattern whose size in the image plane will be

1.22 A)
D

Two objects whose images are closer than this distance will not be
resolved, they will be seen as one. The corresponding minimum

separation, dmin, in the object plane is given by

[um/m

1.221 1
D .

 

as: u[ (10.27)

 

 

. U
01', SIHCC m = —

f

1.22f/1
= T
Now, combining Eqs. (10.26) and (10.28), we get
at ‘ 2 1.221
374 mm 2tan,8

(10.28)

 

2019-20