Duol Nature of Radiation

and Matter

0 In Einstein’s picture, the basic elementary process involved in
photoelectric effect is the absorption of a light quantum by an electron.
This process is instantaneous. Thus, whatever may be the intensity
i.e., the number of quanta of radiation per unit area per unit time,
photoelectric emission is instantaneous. Low intensity does not mean
delay in emission, since the basic elementary process is the same.
Intensity only determines how many electrons are able to participate
in the elementary process (absorption of a light quantum by a single
electron) and, therefore, the photoelectric current.

Using Eq. (1 1.1), the photoelectric equation, Eq. (1 1.2), can be

written as

eV0=hv—¢0; for VZVO

or V0: [ﬂy—E (11.4)
e e

This is an important result. It predicts that the V0 versus v curve is a
straight line with slope = (h/ e), independent of the nature of the material.
During 1 906- 1 9 1 6, Millikan performed a series of experiments on
photoelectric effect, aimed at disproving Einstein’s photoelectric equation.
He measured the slope of the straight line obtained for sodium, similar to
that shown in Fig. 1 1.5. Using the known value of e, he determined the
value of Planck’s constant h. This value was close to the value of Planck’s
contant (= 6.626 X 10‘34J s) determined in an entirely different context.
In this way, in 1 9 16, Millikan proved the validity of Einstein’s photoelectric
equation, instead of disproving it.

The successful explanation of photoelectric effect using the hypothesis
of light quanta and the experimental determination of values of hand $0,
in agreement with values obtained from other experiments, led to the
acceptance of Einstein’s picture of photoelectric effect. Millikan verified
photoelectric equation with great precision, for a number of alkali metals

over a wide range of radiation frequencies.

1 1.7 PARTICLE NATURE OF LIGHT: THE PHOTON

Photoelectric effect thus gave evidence to the strange fact that light in
interaction with matter behaved as if it was made of quanta or packets of
energy, each of energy h v.

Is the light quantum of energy to be associated with a particle? Einstein
arrived at the important result, that the light quantum can also be
associated with momentum (h v/ c). A definite value of energy as well as
momentum is a strong sign that the light quantum can be associated
with a particle. This particle was later named photon. The particle-like
behaviour of light was further confirmed, in 1924, by the experiment of
AH. Compton (1892-1962) on scattering of X-rays from electrons. In
192 1, Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contribution
to theoretical physics and the photoelectric effect. In 1923, Millikan was
awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for his work on the elementary
charge of electricity and on the photoelectric effect.

We can summarise the photon picture of electromagnetic radiation
as follows:

2019-20

395