l Physics

 

Ea

Electron energr

Ev

FIGURE 14.6 (a)

   

E9
(a)

An intrinsic semiconductor
will behave like an insulator at

EC T T: O K as shown in Fig. 14.6(a).

It is the thermal energy at

E9 higher temperatures (T > OK),
i which excites some electrons
from the valence band to the

EV
conduction band. These

thermally excited electrons at
T > O K, partially occupy the
conduction band. Therefore,
the energy-band diagram of an
intrinsic semiconductor will be

 

(b)

An intrinsic semiconductor at T = O K as Shown in Fig- 14-6(b)- Here,

behaves like insulator. (b) At T > O K. four thermally generated some eleCtI'OHS 31‘ e ShOWIl in
electron-hole pairs. The filled circles (-) represent electrons the COHduCtiOﬂ band. These

474

and empty circles (0) represent holes.

EXAMPLE 14. 1

have come from the valence
band leaving equal number of
holes there.

Example 14.1 C, Si and Ge have same lattice structure. Why is C
insulator while Si and Ge intrinsic semiconductors?

Solution The 4 bonding electrons of C, Si or Ge lie, respectively, in
the second, third and fourth orbit. Hence, energy required to take
out an electron from these atoms (i.e., ionisation energr Eg) will be
least for Ge, followed by Si and highest for C. Hence, number of free
electrons for conduction in Ge and Si are significant but negligibly
small for C.

14.4 EXTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR

The conductivity of an intrinsic semiconductor depends on its
temperature, but at room temperature its conductivity is very low. As
such, no important electronic devices can be developed using these
semiconductors. Hence there is a necessity of improving their
conductivity. This can be done by making use of impurities.

When a small amount, say, a few parts per million (ppm), of a suitable
impurity is added to the pure semiconductor, the conductivity of the
semiconductor is increased manifold. Such materials are known as
extrinsic semiconductors or impurity semiconductors. The deliberate
addition of a desirable impurity is called doping and the impurity atoms
are called dopants. Such a material is also called a doped semiconductor.
The dopant has to be such that it does not distort the original pure
semiconductor lattice. It occupies only a very few of the original
semiconductor atom sites in the crystal. A necessary condition to attain
this is that the sizes of the dopant and the semiconductor atoms should
be nearly the same.

There are two types of dopants used in doping the tetravalent Si
or Ge:

(i) Pentavalent (valency 5); like Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Phosphorous

(P), etc.

2019-20