Em

| I OEGCHO-‘l

CHAPTER FOUR

MOTION IN A PLANE

4. 1 Introduction

4.2 Scalars and vectors

4.3 Multiplication of vectors by
real numbers

4.4 Addition and subtraction of
vectors — graphical method

4.5 Resolution of vectors

4.6 Vector addition — analytical
method

4.7 Motion in a plane

4.8 Motion in a plane with
constant acceleration

4.9 Relative velocity in two

dimensions
4.10 Projectile motion
4.1 1 Uniform circular motion

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises

 

4. 1 INTRODUCTION

In the last chapter we developed the concepts of position,
displacement, velocity and acceleration that are needed to
describe the motion of an object along a straight line. We
found that the directional aspect of these quantities can be
taken care of by + and — signs, as in one dimension only two
directions are possible. But in order to describe motion of an
object in two dimensions (a plane) or three dimensions
(space), we need to use vectors to describe the above-
mentioned physical quantities. Therefore, it is first necessary
to learn the language of vectors. What is a vector? How to
add, subtract and multiply vectors ? What is the result of
multiplying a vector by a real number ? We shall learn this
to enable us to use vectors for defining velocity and
acceleration in a plane. We then discuss motion of an object
in a plane. As a simple case of motion in a plane, we shall
discuss motion with constant acceleration and treat in detail
the projectile motion. Circular motion is a familiar class of
motion that has a special significance in daily-life situations.
We shall discuss uniform circular motion in some detail.
The equations developed in this chapter for motion in a
plane can be easily extended to the case of three dimensions.

4.2 SCALARS AND VECTORS

In physics, we can classify quantities as scalars or
vectors. Basically, the difference is that a direction is
associated with a vector but not with a scalar. A scalar
quantity is a quantity with magnitude only. It is specified
completely by a single number, along with the proper
unit. Examples are : the distance between two points,
mass of an object, the temperature of a body and the
time at which a certain event happened. The rules for
combining scalars are the rules of ordinary algebra.
Scalars can be added, subtracted, multiplied and divided

2019-20