i Physics

 

5. 15 A short bar magnet of magnetic movement 5.25 X 10‘2 J T’1 is placed
with its axis perpendicular to the earth’s field direction. At what
distance from the centre of the magnet, the resultant ﬁeld is inclined
at 45° with earth’s field on (a) its normal bisector and (b) its axis.
Magnitude of the earth’s field at the place is given to be 0.42 G.
Ignore the length of the magnet in comparison to the distances
involved.

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES

5.16 Answer the following questions:

(a) Why does a paramagnetic sample display greater magnetisation
(for the same magnetising field) when cooled?

(b) Why is diamagnetism, in contrast, almost independent of
temperature?

(c) If a toroid uses bismuth for its core, will the field in the core be
(slightly) greater or (slightly) less than when the core is empty?

(d) Is the permeability of a ferromagnetic material independent of
the magnetic ﬁeld? If not, is it more for lower or higher fields?

(e) Magnetic field lines are always nearly normal to the surface of a
ferromagnet at every point. (This fact is analogous to the static
electric ﬁeld lines being normal to the surface of a conductor at
every point.) Why?

(f) Would the maximum possible magnetisation of a paramagnetic
sample be of the same order of magnitude as the magnetisation
of a ferromagnet?

5.17 Answer the following questions:

(a) Explain qualitatively on the basis of domain picture the
irreversibility in the magnetisation curve of a ferromagnet.

(b) The hysteresis loop of a soft iron piece has a much smaller area
than that of a carbon steel piece. If the material is to go through
repeated cycles of magnetisation, which piece will dissipate greater
heat energy?

(c) ‘A system displaying a hysteresis loop such as a ferromagnet, is
a device for storing memory?’ Explain the meaning of this
statement.

(d) What kind of ferromagnetic material is used for coating magnetic
tapes in a cassette player, or for building ‘memory stores’ in a
modern computer?

(e) A certain region of space is to be shielded from magnetic fields.
Suggest a method.

5.18 A long straight horizontal cable carries a current of 2.5 A in the
direction 10° south of west to 10° north of east. The magnetic meridian
of the place happens to be 10° west of the geographic meridian. The
earth’s magnetic ﬁeld at the location is 0.33 G, and the angle of dip
is zero. Locate the line of neutral points (ignore the thickness of the
cable)? (At neutral points, magnetic field due to a current-carrying
cable is equal and opposite to the horizontal component of earth’s
magnetic field.)

5.19 A telephone cable at a place has four long straight horizontal wires
202 carrying a current of 1.0 A in the same direction east to west. The

2019-20