94

i Physics

and the quotient

1:? (3.1)

is deﬁned to be the current across the area in the forward direction. (If it
turn out to be a negative number, it implies a current in the backward
direction.)

Currents are not always steady and hence more generally, we deﬁne
the current as follows. Let AQ be the net charge ﬂowing across a cross-
section of a conductor during the time interval At [i.e., between times t
and (t + At)]. Then, the current at time tacross the cross-section of the
conductor is defined as the value of the ratio of AQ to At in the limit of At
tending to zero,

I(t) 2 lim— (3.2)

In 81 units, the unit of current is ampere. An ampere is defined
through magnetic effects of currents that we will study in the following
chapter. An ampere is typically the order of magnitude of currents in
domestic appliances. An average lightning carries currents of the order
of tens of thousands of amperes and at the other extreme, currents in
our nerves are in microamperes.

3.3 ELECTRIC CURRENTS IN CONDUCTORS

An electric charge will experience a force if an electric ﬁeld is applied. If it is
free to move, it will thus move contributing to a current. In nature, free
charged particles do exist like in upper strata of atmosphere called the
ionosphere. However, in atoms and molecules, the negatively charged
electrons and the positively charged nuclei are bound to each other and
are thus not free to move. Bulk matter is made up of many molecules, a
gram of water, for example, contains approximately 1 O22 molecules. These
molecules are so closely packed that the electrons are no longer attached
to individual nuclei. In some materials, the electrons will still be bound,
i.e., they will not accelerate even if an electric ﬁeld is applied. In other
materials, notably metals, some of the electrons are practically free to move
within the bulk material. These materials, generally called conductors,
develop electric currents in them when an electric field is applied.

If we consider solid conductors, then of course the atoms are tightly
bound to each other so that the current is carried by the negatively
charged electrons. There are, however, other types of conductors like
electrolytic solutions where positive and negative charges both can move.
In our discussions, we will focus only on solid conductors so that the
current is carried by the negatively charged electrons in the background
of fixed positive ions.

Consider ﬁrst the case when no electric field is present. The electrons
will be moving due to thermal motion during which they collide with the
fixed ions. An electron colliding with an ion emerges with the same speed
as before the collision. However, the direction of its velocity after the
collision is completely random. At a given time, there is no preferential
direction for the velocities of the electrons. Thus on the average, the

2019-20