MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 59
—

3.22 Figure 3.25 gives a speed—time graph of
a particle in motion along a constant
direction. Three equal intervals of time
are shown. In which interval is the
average acceleration greatest in
magnitude ? In which interval is the
average speed greatest ? Choosing the
positive direction as the constant
direction of motion, give the signs of v
and a in the three intervals. What are
the accelerations at the points A, B, C
and D ?

 

Additional Exercises

3.23 A three—wheeler starts from rest, accelerates uniformly with 1 m 5‘2 on a straight
road for 10 s, and then moves with uniform velocity. Plot the distance covered by
the vehicle during the nth second [n = 1,2,3....] versus n. What do you expect this
plot to be during accelerated motion : a straight line or a parabola ?

3.24 A boy standing on a stationary lift [open from above] throws a ball upwards with
the maximum initial speed he can, equal to 49 m s4. How much time does the ball
take to return to his hands? If the lift starts moving up with a uniform speed of
5 m s’1 and the boy again throws the ball up with the maximum speed he can, how
long does the ball take to return to his hands ?

3.25 On a long horizontally moving belt (Fig. 3.26), a child runs to and fro with a speed
9 km h [with respect to the belt] between his father and mother located 50 m apart
on the moving belt. The belt moves with a speed of 4 km h‘l. For an observer on a
stationary platform outside, what is the
[a] speed of the child running in the direction of motion of the belt ?.
(b) speed of the child running opposite to the direction of motion of the belt ?
(c) time taken by the child in (a) and [b] ?

Which of the answers alter if motion is viewed by one of the parents ?

Moving belt , 4 km/h

 

Stationary observer

Fig. 3.26

3.26 Two stones are thrown up simultaneously from the edge of a cliff 200 m high with
initial speeds of 15 m s*1 and 30 m s4. Verify that the graph shown in Fig. 3.27
correctly represents the time variation of the relative position of the second stone
with respect to the first. Neglect air resistance and assume that the stones do not
rebound after hitting the ground. Take 9 = 10 m s”. Give the equations for the
linear and curved parts of the plot.

2019-20