Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

THE BROWNING CHILD, LIFEGUARD AND SNELL’S LAW

Consider a rectangular swimming pool PQSR; see ﬁgure here. A lifeguard sitting at G
outside the pool notices a child drowning at a point C. The guard wants to reach the
child in the shortest possible time. Let SR be the
side of the pool between G and C. Should he/ she P Q
take a straight line path GAC between G and C or
GBC in which the path BC in water would be the
shortest, or some other path GXC? The guard knows
that his / her running speed v1 on ground is higher
than his / her swimming speed 02.

Suppose the guard enters water at X. Let GX =11
and XC =12. Then the time taken to reach from G to
C would be

t=_li+l_2
v1 v2

 

To make this time minimum, one has to
differentiate it (with respect to the coordinate of X) and find the point X when tis a
minimum. On doing all this algebra (which we skip here), we find that the guard should
enter water at a point where Snell’s law is satisfied. To understand this, draw a
perpendicular LM to side SR at X. Let AGXM = iand ACXL = r. Then it can be seen that t
is minimum when

sini v1

 

sin r 02

In the case of light 01/02, the ratio of the velocity of light in vacuum to that in the
medium, is the refractive index n of the medium.

In short, whether it is a wave or a particle or a human being, whenever two mediums
and two velocities are involved, one must follow Snell’s law if one wants to take the

shortest time.

9.4 TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION

When light travels from an optically denser medium to a rarer medium
at the interface, it is partly reﬂected back into the same medium and
partly refracted to the second medium. This reﬂection is called the internal
reﬂection.

When a ray of light enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium,
it bends away from the normal, for example, the ray AO1 B in Fig. 9.12.
The incident ray A01 is partially reﬂected (01 C) and partially transmitted
(01B) or refracted, the angle of refraction (r) being larger than the angle of
incidence (i). As the angle of incidence increases, so does the angle of
refraction, till for the ray A03, the angle of refraction is 7t/ 2. The refracted
ray is bent so much away from the normal that it grazes the surface at
the interface between the two media. This is shown by the ray AO3 D in
Fig. 9.12. If the angle of incidence is increased still further (e. g., the ray
A04), refraction is not possible, and the incident ray is totally reﬂected. 319

2019-20