l Physics

 

9.7 SOME NATURAL PHENOMENA DUE TO SUNLIGHT

The Interplay of light with things around us gives rise to several beautiful
phenomena. The spectacles of colours that we see around us all the time
is possible due to sunlight.

While studying dispersion of visible (or white) light by a prism
(Class X) and the electromagnetic spectrum (Chapter 8, Class XII), we
got to know that colour is associated with the frequency of light or the
wavelength of light in the given medium. In the visible spectrum, red
light is at the long wavelength end (~ 700 nm) while the violet light is at
the short wavelength end (~ 400 nm). Dispersion takes place because
the refractive index of medium for different frequencies (colours) is
different. For example, the bending of red component of white light is
least while it is most for the violet. Equivalently, red light travels faster
than Violet light in a glass prism. Table 9.2 gives the refractive indices for
different wavelength for crown glass and ﬂint glass. Thick lenses could
be assumed as made of many prisms, therefore, thick lenses show
chromatic aberration due to dispersion of light. When white light passes
through thick lenses, red and blue colours focus at different points. This
phenomenon is known as chromatic aberration.

TABLE 9.2 REFRACTIVE INDICES FOR DIFFERENT WAVELENGTHS

Violet
Blue

Yellow

Red

332

396.9 1.533 1.663
486.1 1.523 1.639
589.3 1.517 1.627
656.3 1.515 1.622

The variation of refractive index with wavelength may be more
pronounced in some media than the other. In vacuum, of course, the
speed of light is independent of wavelength. Thus, vacuum (or air
approximately) is a non-dispersive medium in which all colours travel
with the same speed. This also follows from the fact that sunlight reaches
us in the form of white light and not as its components. On the other
hand, glass is a dispersive medium.

The blue of the sky, white clouds, the red-hue at sunrise and sunset,
the rainbow, the brilliant colours of some pearls, shells, and wings of
birds, are just a few of the natural wonders we are used to. We describe
some of them here from the point of view of physics.

2019-20