Duol Noture of Radiation

ond Moﬁer

 

SUMMARY

The minimum energy needed by an electron to come out from a metal
surface is called the work function of the metal. Energy [greater than
the work function ((1)0) required for electron emission from the metal
surface can be supplied by suitably heating or applying strong electric
field or irradiating it by light of suitable frequency.

Photoelectric effect is the phenomenon of emission of electrons by metals
when illuminated by light of suitable frequency. Certain metals respond
to ultraviolet light while others are sensitive even to the visible light.
Photoelectric effect involves conversion of light energy into electrical
energy. It follows the law of conservation of energy. The photoelectric
emission is an instantaneous process and possesses certain special
features.

Photoelectric current depends on (i) the intensity of incident light, (ii)
the potential difference applied between the two electrodes, and [iii]
the nature of the emitter material.

The stopping potential We) depends on [i] the frequency of incident
light, and (ii) the nature of the emitter material. For a given frequency
of incident light, it is independent of its intensity. The stopping potential
is directly related to the maximum kinetic energy of electrons emitted:
e V0 = [1/2] m vim = Kmax.

Below a certain frequency [threshold frequency) v0, characteristic of
the metal, no photoelectric emission takes place, no matter how large
the intensity may be.

The classical wave theory could not explain the main features of
photoelectric effect. Its picture of continuous absorption of energy from
radiation could not explain the independence of Kmax on intensity, the
existence of v0 and the instantaneous nature of the process. Einstein
explained these features on the basis of photon picture of light.
According to this, light is composed of discrete packets of energy called
quanta or photons. Each photon carries an energy E [= hv} and
momentum p (= h/k), which depend on the frequency (v) of incident
light and not on its intensity. Photoelectric emission from the metal
surface occurs due to absorption of a photon by an electron.

Einstein’s photoelectric equation is in accordance with the energy
conservation law as applied to the photon absorption by an electron in
the metal. The maximum kinetic energy (1/2)m vim is equal to
the photon energy (hv) minus the work function (1)0 [= hvo] of the
target metal:

1

Emvfmjx: V0 e= hv—¢0= h[v— v0)
This photoelectric equation explains all the features of the photoelectric
effect. Millikan’s first precise measurements confirmed the Einstein’s
photoelectric equation and obtained an accurate value of Planck’s
constant h. This led to the acceptance of particle or photon description

[nature] of electromagnetic radiation, introduced by Einstein.

Radiation has dual nature: wave and particle. The nature of experiment
determines whether a wave or particle description is best suited for
understanding the experimental result. Reasoning that radiation and
matter should be symmetrical in nature, Louis Victor de Broglie

2019-20

405