CHAPTER THREE

 

HOSECHDS

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE

Introduction

Position, path length and
displacement

Average velocity and average
speed

Instantaneous velocity and
speed

Acceleration

Kinematic equations for
uniformly accelerated motion

Relative velocity

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises
Appendix 3. l

 

3. 1 INTRODUCTION

Motion is common to everything in the universe. We walk,
run and ride a bicycle. Even when we are sleeping, air moves
into and out of our lungs and blood ﬂows in arteries and
veins. We see leaves falling from trees and water ﬂowing
down a dam. Automobiles and planes carry people from one
place to the other. The earth rotates once every twenty-four
hours and revolves round the sun once in a year. The sun
itself is in motion in the Milky Way, which is again moving
within its local group of galaxies.

Motion is change in position of an object with time. How
does the position change with time ? In this chapter, we shall
learn how to describe motion. For this, we develop the
concepts of velocity and acceleration. We shall confine
ourselves to the study of motion of objects along a straight
line, also known as rectilinear motion. For the case of
rectilinear motion with uniform acceleration, a set of simple
equations can be obtained. Finally, to understand the relative
nature of motion, we introduce the concept of relative velocity.

In our discussions, we shall treat the objects in motion as
point objects. This approximation is valid so far as the size
of the object is much smaller than the distance it moves in a
reasonable duration of time. In a good number of situations
in real-life, the size of objects can be neglected and they can
be considered as point-like objects without much error.

In Kinematics, we study ways to describe motion without
going into the causes of motion. What causes motion
described in this chapter and the next chapter forms the
subject matter of Chapter 5.

3.2 POSITION. PATH LENGTH AND DISPLACEMENT

Earlier you learnt that motion is change in position of an
object with time. In order to specify position, we need to use
a reference point and a set of axes. It is convenient to choose

2019-20