i Physics

 

LIGHT SOURCES AND PHOTOMETRY

It is known that a body above absolute zero temperature emits electromagnetic radiation.
The wavelength region in which the body emits the radiation depends on its absolute
temperature. Radiation emitted by a hot body, for example, a tungsten ﬁlament lamp
having temperature 2850 K are partly invisible and mostly in infrared (or heat) region.
As the temperature of the body increases radiation emitted by it is in visible region. The
sun with temperature of about 5500 K emits radiation whose energy versus wavelength
graph peaks approximately at 550 nm corresponding to green light and is almost in the
middle of the visible region. The energy versus wavelength distribution graph for a given
body peaks at some wavelength, which is inversely proportional to the absolute
temperature of that body.

The measurement of light as perceived by human eye is called photometry. Photometry
is measurement of a physiological phenomenon, being the stimulus of light as received
by the human eye, transmitted by the optic nerves and analysed by the brain. The main
physical quantities in photometry are (i) the luminous intensity of the source,
(ii) the luminous ﬂux or flow of light from the source, and (iii) illuminance of the surface.
The 81 unit of luminous intensity (I ) is candela (cd). The candela is the luminous intensity,
in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency
540 X 1012 Hz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1 / 683 watt per steradian.
If a light source emits one candela of luminous intensity into a solid angle of one steradian,
the total luminous ﬂux emitted into that solid angle is one lumen (lm). A standard
100 watt incadescent light bulb emits approximately 1700 lumens.

In photometry, the only parameter, which can be measured directly is illuminance. It
is defined as luminous ﬂux incident per unit area on a surface (lm/m2 or lux). Most light
meters measure this quantity. The illuminance E, produced by a source of luminous
intensity I , is given by E = I / r2 , where r is the normal distance of the surface from the
source. A quantity named luminance (L), is used to characterise the brightness of emitting
or reﬂecting ﬂat surfaces. Its unit is cd/m2 (sometimes called ‘nit’ in industry). A good
LCD computer monitor has a brightness of about 250 nits.

Now, for ANOC, iis the exterior angle. Therefore, i= ANOM + ANCM

'= —MN+—MN (9.13)
OM MC
Similarly,
r=ANCM—ZNIM
. _ w _ w 9 ,4
1.e., r— MC MI ( - )

Now, by Snell’s law
n1 sin i= n2 sin r
or for small angles

324 nli = n2r

2019-20