10.

 

 

SUMMARY

An atom has a nucleus. The nucleus is positively charged. The radius
of the nucleus is smaller than the radius of an atom by a factor of
104. More than 99.9% mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus.

On the atomic scale, mass is measured in atomic mass units (u). By
definition, 1 atomic mass unit [lu] is 1/ 12th mass of one atom of 120;

lu = 1.660563 x 10‘27 kg.

A nucleus contains a neutral particle called neutron. Its mass is almost
the same as that of proton

The atomic number Z is the number of protons in the atomic nucleus
of an element. The mass number A is the total number of protons and
neutrons in the atomic nucleus; A = Z+N; Here N denotes the number
of neutrons in the nucleus.

A nuclear species or a nuclide is represented as 2X, where X is the
chemical symbol of the species.

Nuclides with the same atomic number Z, but different neutron number
N are called isotopes. Nuclides with the same A are isobars and those
with the same N are isotones.

Most elements are mixtures of two or more isotopes. The atomic mass
of an element is a weighted average of the masses of its isotopes. The
masses are the relative abundances of the isotopes.

A nucleus can be considered to be spherical in shape and assigned a
radius. Electron scattering experiments allow determination of the
nuclear radius; it is found that radii of nuclei fit the formula

R = R0 Al/S’
where R0 = a constant = 1.2 fm. This implies that the nuclear density
is independent of A. It is of the order of 1017 kg/ms.

Neutrons and protons are bound in a nucleus by the short—range strong
nuclear force. The nuclear force does not distinguish between neutron
and proton.

The nuclear mass M is always less than the total mass, Em, of its
constituents. The difference in mass of a nucleus and its constituents
is called the mass defect,

AM=[Zmp+[A~Z]mn)—M

Using Einstein’s mass energy relation, we express this mass difference
in terms of energy as

AEb = AM c2
The energy AEb represents the binding energy of the nucleus. In the

mass number range A = 30 to 170, the binding energy per nucleon is
nearly constant, about 8 MeV/ nucleon.

Energies associated with nuclear processes are about a million times
larger than chemical process.

The Q—value of a nuclear process is

Q = final kinetic energy ~ initial kinetic energy.
Due to conservation of mass—energy, this is also,

Q = [sum of initial masses — sum of final masses)c2

Radioactivity is the phenomenon in which nuclei of a given species
transform by giving out on or ,B or yrays; a—rays are helium nuclei;

2019-20

Nuclei

459