Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits

 

 

the ratio of GazAs is 1:1 but in Ga—rich or As-rich GaAs it could
respectively be Oral.1 Aso.g or G309 Asu. In general, the presence of
defects control the properties of semiconductors in many ways.

3. In modern day circuit, many logical gates or circuits are integrated in
one single ‘Chip'. These are known as Intgrated circuits (1C).

EXERCISES

14.1 In an n-type silicon, which of the following statement is true:
(a) Electrons are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the
dopants.

(b) Electrons are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.

(c) Holes are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.

(d) Holes are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the dopants.

14.2 Which of the statements given in Exercise 14.1 is true for p-type
semiconductos.

14.3 Carbon, silicon and germanium have four valence electrons each.
These are characterised by valence and conduction bands separated
by energy band gap respectively equal to (E g)C, (E g)Si and (Eg)Ge. Which
of the following statements is true?

(a) (E g)Si< (E .96. < (Eg)C
(b) (Eg)C < (Eg)Ge > (Eggi
(c) (Eg)C>(Eg)S,>(Eg)Ge
(d) (E9)C = (E9)Si = (E9)Ge

14.4 In an unbiased p-n junction, holes diffuse from the p-region to
n-region because

(a) free electrons in the n-region attract them.
(b) they move across the junction by the potential difference.
(c) hole concentration in p-region is more as compared to n-region.
(d) All the above.
14.5 When a forward bias is applied to a p-n junction, it
(a) raises the potential barrier.
(b) reduces the majority carrier current to zero.
(c) lowers the potential barrier.
(d) None of the above.

14.6 In half-wave rectification, what is the output frequency if the input
frequency is 50 Hz. What is the output frequency of a full-wave rectiﬁer
for the same input frequency.

14.7 A p-n photodiode is fabricated from a semiconductor with band gap
of 2.8 eV. Can it detect a wavelength of 6000 nm?

497

2019-20