4.19

4.20

4.21

4.22

4.23

4.24

 

 

Moving Charges and

Magnetism

 

along a straight path with constant speed. What can you say
about the initial velocity of the particle?

(b) A charged particle enters an environment of a strong and
non-uniform magnetic field varying from point to point both in
magnitude and direction, and comes out of it following a
complicated trajectory. Would its final speed equal the initial
speed if it suffered no collisions with the environment?

(c) An electron travelling west to east enters a chamber having a
uniform electrostatic field in north to south direction. Specify
the direction in which a uniform magnetic field should be set
up to prevent the electron from deﬂecting from its straight line
path.

An electron emitted by a heated cathode and accelerated through a
potential difference of 2.0 kV, enters a region with uniform magnetic
field of 0.15 T. Determine the trajectory of the electron if the field
(a) is transverse to its initial velocity, (b) makes an angle of 309 with
the initial velocity.

A magnetic field set up using Helmholtz coils (described in Exercise
4.16) is uniform in a small region and has a magnitude of 0.75 T. In
the same region, a uniform electrostatic field is maintained in a
direction normal to the common axis of the coils. A narrow beam of
(single species) charged particles all accelerated through 15 kV
enters this region in a direction perpendicular to both the axis of
the coils and the electrostatic field. If the beam remains undeﬂected
when the electrostatic field is 9.0 X 10’5 V m'l, make a simple guess
as to what the beam contains. Why is the answer not unique?

A straight horizontal conducting rod of length 0.45 m and mass
60 g is suspended by two vertical wires at its ends. A current of 5.0 A
is set up in the rod through the wires.

(a) What magnetic field should be set up normal to the conductor
in order that the tension in the wires is zero?

(b) What will be the total tension in the wires if the direction of
current is reversed keeping the magnetic field same as before?
(Ignore the mass of the wires.) g = 9.8 m s’z.

The wires which connect the battery of an automobile to its starting
motor carry a current of 300 A (for a short time). What is the force
per unit length between the wires if they are 70 cm long and 1.5 cm
apart? Is the force attractive or repulsive?

A uniform magnetic field of 1.5 T exists in a cylindrical region of
radius 10.0 cm, its direction parallel to the axis along east to west. A
wire carrying current of 7.0 A in the north to south direction passes
through this region. What is the magnitude and direction of the
force on the wire if,

(a) the wire intersects the axis,

(b) the wire is turned from N-S to northeast-northwest direction,
(c) the wire in the N-S direction is lowered from the axis by a distance
of 6.0 cm?

A uniform magnetic field of 3000 G is established along the positive
z—direction. A rectangular loop of sides 10 cm and 5 cm carries a
current of 12 A. What is the torque on the loop in the different cases
shown in Fig. 4.28? What is the force on each case? Which case
corresponds to stable equilibrium?

2019-20

171