Moving Charges and
Magnetism

4.5 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE To A CURRENT ELEMENT,
BIOT-SAVART LAW

All magnetic ﬁelds that we know are due to currents (or moving charges)
and due to intrinsic magnetic moments of particles. Here, we

shall study the relation between current and the magnetic ﬁeld

it produces. It is given by the Biot-Savart’s law. Figure 4.9 shows

a ﬁnite conductor XY carrying current I . Consider an inﬁnitesimal Y
element dl of the conductor. The magnetic field dB due to this
element is to be determined at a point P which is at a distance r

from it. Let 0 be the angle between dl and the displacement vector

r. According to Biot—Savart’s law, the magnitude of the magnetic

ﬁeld dB is proportional to the current I, the element length I dll ,

and inversely proportional to the square of the distance r. Its
direction* is perpendicular to the plane containing dl and r .

Thus, in vector notation,

 

 

Current element

 

Idlxr
dB 0: 3
r FIGURE 4.9 Illustration of
#0 Idl><r the Blot—Savart law. The
= _ 3 [4_11(a)] current element 1 dl
47‘ r produces a field dB at a
where ,uO/47t is a constant of proportionality. The above (“Stance r- The ® Sign

expression holds when the medium is vacuum.
The magnitude of this ﬁeld is,

|dB| = [4.1 MW

47: r2

where we have used the property of cross-product. Equation [4.1 1 (a)]
constitutes our basic equation for the magnetic ﬁeld. The proportionality
constant in SI units has the exact value,

& = —7
476 10 Tm/A [4.11(C)]

We call ,uO the permeability of free space (or vacuum).

The Biot-Savart law for the magnetic ﬁeld has certain similarities, as
well as, differences with the Coulomb’s law for the electrostatic ﬁeld. Some
of these are:

(i) Both are long range, since both depend inversely on the square of
distance from the source to the point of interest. The principle of
superposition applies to both fields. [In this connection, note that
the magnetic ﬁeld is linear in the source I dl just as the electrostatic
ﬁeld is linear in its source: the electric charge]

(ii) The electrostatic ﬁeld is produced by a scalar source, namely, the
electric charge. The magnetic ﬁeld is produced by a vector source
I dl.

* The sense of le r is also given by the Right Hand Screw mle : Look at the
plane containing vectors dl and 1'. Imagine moving from the first vector towards
second vector. If the movement is anticlockwise, the resultant is towards you.
If it is clockwise, the resultant is away from you.

2019-20

indicates that the
field is perpendicular
to the plane of this
,uo Idl sine page and directed

into it.

143