Electromagnetic
Waves

We brieﬂy describe these different types of electromagnetic waves, in
order of decreasing wavelengths.

8.4. 1 Radio waves

Radio waves are produced by the accelerated motion of charges in conducting
wires. They are used in radio and television communication systems. They
are generally in the frequency range from 500 kHz to about 1000 MHZ.
The AM (amplitude modulated) band is from 530 kHz to 1 710 kHz. Higher
frequencies upto 54 MHZ are used for short wave bands. TV waves range
from 54 MHZ to 890 MHZ. The FM (frequency modulated) radio band
extends from 88 MHZ to 108 MHZ. Cellular phones use radio waves to
transmit voice communication in the ultrahigh frequency (UHF) band. How
these waves are transmitted and received is described in Chapter 15.

8.4.2 Microwaves

Microwaves (short-wavelength radio waves), with frequencies in the
gigahertZ (GHZ) range, are produced by special vacuum tubes (called
klystrons, magnetrons and Gunn diodes). Due to their short wavelengths,
they are suitable for the radar systems used in aircraft navigation. Radar
also provides the basis for the speed guns used to time fast balls, tennis-
serves, and automobiles. Microwave ovens are an interesting domestic
application of these waves. In such ovens, the frequency of the microwaves
is selected to match the resonant frequency of water molecules so that
energy from the waves is transferred efficiently to the kinetic energy of
the molecules. This raises the temperature of any food containing water.

MICROWAVE OVEN

The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation contains a part known as microwaves. These
waves have frequency and energy smaller than visible light and wavelength larger than it.
What is the principle of a microwave oven and how does it work?

Our objective is to cook food or warm it up. All food items such as fruit, vegetables,
meat, cereals, etc. , contain water as a constituent. Now, what does it mean when we say that
a certain object has become warmer? When the temperature of a body rises, the energy of
the random motion of atoms and molecules increases and the molecules travel or vibrate or
rotate with higher energies. The frequency of rotation of water molecules is about
2.45 gigahertZ (GHZ). If water receives microwaves of this frequency, its molecules absorb
this radiation, which is equivalent to heating up water. These molecules share this energy
with neighbouring food molecules, heating up the food.

One should use porcelain vessels and not metal containers in a microwave oven because
of the danger of getting a shock from accumulated electric charges. Metals may also melt
from heating. The porcelain container remains unaffected and cool, because its large
molecules vibrate and rotate with much smaller frequencies, and thus cannot absorb
microwaves. Hence, they do not get heated up.

Thus, the basic principle of a microwave oven is to generate microwave radiation of
appropriate frequency in the working space of the oven where we keep food. This way
energy is not wasted in heating up the vessel. In the conventional heating method, the vessel
on the burner gets heated first, and then the food inside gets heated because of transfer of
energy from the vessel. In the microwave oven, on the other hand, energy is directly delivered
to water molecules which is shared by the entire food.

Microwave

 

281

2019-20