MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS

257

moves inside the master cylinder, and the
pressure caused is transmitted through the
brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large
force acts on the piston and is pushed down
expanding the brake shoes against brake lining.
In this way, a small force on the pedal produces
a large retarding force on the wheel. An
important advantage of the system is that the
pressure set up by pressing pedal is transmitted
equally to all cylinders attached to the four
wheels so that the braking effort is equal on
all wheels.

10.3 STREAMLINE FLOW

So far we have studied ﬂuids at rest. The study
of the ﬂuids in motion is known as ﬂuid
dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly,
the water ﬂow is smooth initially, but loses its
smoothness when the speed of the outﬂow is
increased. In studying the motion of ﬂuids, we
focus our attention on what is happening to
various ﬂuid particles at a particular point in
space at a particular time. The ﬂow of the ﬂuid
is said to be steady if at any given point, the
velocity of each passing ﬂuid particle remains
constant in time. This does not mean that the
velocity at different points in space is same. The
velocity of a particular particle may change as it
moves from one point to another. That is, at some
other point the particle may have a different
velocity, but every other particle which passes
the second point behaves exactly as the previous
particle that has just passed that point. Each
particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of
the particles do not cross each other.

Fig. 10.7 The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical
trajectory of a ﬂuid particle.
(b) A region of streamline ﬂow.

The path taken by a ﬂuid particle under a
steady ﬂow is a streamline. It is defined as a
curve whose tangent at any point is in the
direction of the ﬂuid velocity at that point.
Consider the path of a particle as shown in
Fig.10.7 (a), the curve describes how a ﬂuid
particle moves with time. The curve PQ is like a
permanent map of ﬂuid ﬂow, indicating how the
ﬂuid streams. No two streamlines can cross, for
if they do, an oncoming ﬂuid particle can go
either one way or the other and the ﬂow would
not be steady. Hence, in steady ﬂow, the map of
ﬂow is stationary in time. How do we draw closely
spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show
streamline of every ﬂowing particle, we would
end up with a continuum of lines. Consider planes
perpendicular to the direction of ﬂuid ﬂow e. g.,
at three points P, R and Q in Fig. 10.7 (b). The
plane pieces are so chosen that their boundaries
be determined by the same set of streamlines.
This means that number of ﬂuid particles
crossing the surfaces as indicated at P, R and Q
is the same. If area of cross- sections at these
points are AP ,AR and AQ and speeds of ﬂuid
particles are PP,v DR and v9, then mass of ﬂuid
AmP crossing at AP Rin a small interval of time At
is pPAPvP At. Similarly mass of ﬂuid AmR ﬂowing
or crossing at AR in a small interval of time At is

pPPARv At and mass of ﬂuid AmQ is pQAQvQ At
crossing at A9. The mass of liquid ﬂowing out
equals the mass ﬂowing in, holds in all cases.
Therefore,

pPAPvPAt— — pRARvR At— — pQAQvQAt (10.9)
For ﬂow of incompressible ﬂuids

Pp: PR: Pg

Equation (10. 9) reduces to

APvP =APvR = AgvQ (10.10)

which is called the equation of continuity and
it is a statement of conservation of mass in ﬂow
of incompressible ﬂuids. In general

Av = constant (10.1 1)

Av gives the volume ﬂux or ﬂow rate and
remains constant throughout the pipe of ﬂow.
Thus, at narrower portions where the
streamlines are closely spaced. velocity
increases and its vice versa. From (Fig 10.7b) it
is clear that AR > A9 or UR < v9, the ﬂuid is
accelerated while passing from R to Q This is
associated with a change in pressure in ﬂuid
ﬂow in horizontal pipes.

Steady ﬂow is achieved at low ﬂow speeds.
Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed,
this ﬂow loses steadiness and becomes

turbulent. One sees this when a fast ﬂowing

2019-20