246 PIIYSICS

 

due to gravity. The material at the bottom 30 x 107 N m'2. Equating this to hpg, with
experiences this force in the vertical direction, p = 3 x 103 kg m'3 gives

and the sides of the mountain are free. Therefore, hpg = 30 x 107 N m‘2 .
this is not a case of pressure or bulk compression. h = 30 x 107 N m"2 / (3 x 103 kg m‘3 x 10 m s‘2)
There is a shear component, approximately hpg = 10 km

itself. Now the elastic limit for a typical rock is which is more than the height of Mt. Everest!

SUMMARY

1. Stress is the restoring force per unit area and strain is the fractional change in dimension.
In general there are three types of stresses (a) tensile stress — longitudinal stress
(associated with stretching) or compressive stress [associated with compression},
(b) shearing stress, and (c) hydraulic stress.

2. For small deformations, stress is directly proportional to the strain for many materials.
This is known as Hooke’s law. The constant of proportionality is called modulus of
elasticity. Three elastic moduli viz., Young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus
are used to describe the elastic behaviour of objects as they respond to deforming forces
that act on them.

A class of solids called elastomers does not obey Hooke’s law.
3. When an object is under tension or compression, the Hooke’s law takes the form
F/A = YAL/ L
where AL/ L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object, Fis the magnitude of the
applied force causing the strain, A is the cross-sectional area over which F is applied
[perpendicular to A) and Yis the Young’s modulus for the object. The stress is F/A.

4. A pair of forces when applied parallel to the upper and lower faces, the solid deforms so
that the upper face moves sideways with respect to the lower. The horizontal displacement
AL of the upper face is perpendicular to the vertical height L. This type of deformation is
called shear and the corresponding stress is the shearing stress. This type of stress is
possible only in solids.

In this kind of deformation the Hooke’s law takes the form

F/A = G x AL/ L
where AL is the displacement of one end of object in the direction of the applied force F,
and G is the shear modulus.

5. When an object undergoes hydraulic compression due to a stress exerted by a surrounding
ﬂuid, the Hooke’s law takes the form

P = B (AV/ VI,
where p is the pressure [hydraulic stress) on the object due to the ﬂuid, AV/ V (the
volume strain) is the absolute fractional change in the object’s volume due to that

pressure and B is the bulk modulus of the object.

POINTS TO PONDER

 

I. In the case ofa wire. suspended from celing and stretched under the action ofa weight (Fl
suspended from its other end. the force exerted by the ceiling on it is equal and opposite
to the weight. However. the tension at any crossesection A of the wire is just Fand not
2F. Hence. tensile stress which is equal to the tension per unit area is equal to F/A.

2. Hooke‘s law is valid only in the linear part of stressrstrain curve.

3. The Young's modulus and shear modulus are relevant only for solids since only solids
have lengths and shapes.

4. Bulk modulus is relevant for solids. liquid and gases. It refers to the change in volume
when every part of the body is under the uniform stress so that the shape of the body
remains unchanged.

2019-20