LAWS OF MOTION

97

always occur in pairs. Further, the mutual forces
between two bodies are always equal and
opposite. This idea was expressed by Newton in
the form of the third law of motion.

To every action, there is always an equal and
opposite reaction.

Newton’s wording of the third law is so crisp and
beautiful that it has become a part of common
language. For the same reason perhaps,
misconceptions about the third law abound. Let
us note some important points about the third
law, particularly in regard to the usage of the
terms : action and reaction.

1. The terms action and reaction in the third law
mean nothing else but ‘force’. Using different
terms for the same physical concept
can sometimes be confusing. A simple
and clear way of stating the third law is as
follows:

Forces always occur in pairs. Force on a
body A by B is equal and opposite to the
force on the body B by A.

2. The terms action and reaction in the third law
may give a wrong impression that action

reﬂecting telescope.

 

Isaac Newton (1 642 - 1 72 7)

Isaac Newton was born in Woolsthorpe, England in 1642. the year Galileo died.
His extraordinary mathematical ability and mechanical aptitude remained hidden
from others in his school life. In 1662. he went to Cambridge for undergraduate
studies. A plague epidemic in 1665 forced the university town to close and Newton
had to return to his mother's farm. There in two years of solitude, his dormant
creativity blossomed in a deluge of fundamental discoveries in mathematics and
physics : binomial theorem for negative and fractional exponents. the beginning of
calculus. the inverse square law of gravitation. the spectrum of white light. and so
on. Returning to Cambridge. he pursued his investigations in optics and devised a

In 1684. encouraged by his friend Edmund Halley. Newton embarked on writing what was to be one of
the greatest scientiﬁc works ever published : The Principia Mathematica. In it. he enunciated the three
laws of motion and the universal law of gravitation. which explained all the three Kepler's laws of
planetary motion. The book was packed with a host of path—breaking achievements : basic principles of
ﬂuid mechanics. mathematics of wave motion, calculation of masses of the earth. the sun and other
planets, explanation of the precession of equinoxes. theory of tides, etc. In 1704, Newton brought out
another masterpiece Opticks that summarized his work on light and colour.

The scientific revolution triggered by Copernicus and steered vigorously ahead by Kepler and Galileo
was brought to a grand completion by Newton. Newtonian mechanics uniﬁed terrestrial and celestial
phenomena. The same mathematical equation governed the fall of an apple to the ground and the
motion of the moon around the earth. The age of reason had dawned.

comes before reaction i.e action is the cause
and reaction the effect. There is no cause-
effect relation implied in the third law. The
force on A by B and the force on B by A act
at the same instant. By the same reasoning,
any one of them may be called action and the
other reaction.

3. Action and reaction forces act on different
bodies, not on the same body. Consider a pair
of bodies A and B. According to the third law,

F = — FBA (5.8)

AB

(force on A by B) = — (force on B by A)

Thus if we are considering the motion of any
one body (A or B), only one of the two forces is
relevant. It is an error to add up the two forces
and claim that the net force is zero.
However, if you are considering the system
of two bodies as a whole, F AB and FBA are
internal forces of the system (A + B). They add
up to give a null force. Internal forces in a
body or a system of particles thus cancel away
in pairs. This is an important fact that
enables the second law to be applicable to a
body or a system of particles (See Chapter 7).

 

 

 

2019-20