Nuclei

—
INDIA’S ATONHC ENERGY PROGRAMME

The atomic energy programme in India was launched around the time of independence
under the leadership of Homi J. Bhabha (1909- 1966). An early historic achievement
was the design and construction of the ﬁrst nuclear reactor in India (named Apsara)
which went critical on August 4, 1956. It used enriched uranium as fuel and water as
moderator. Following this was another notable landmark: the construction of CIRUS
(Canada India Research U.S.) reactor in 1960. This 40 MW reactor used natural uranium
as fuel and heavy water as moderator. Apsara and CIRUS spurred research in a wide
range of areas of basic and applied nuclear science. An important milestone in the ﬁrst
two decades of the programme was the indigenous design and construction of the
plutonium plant at Trombay, which ushered in the technology of fuel reprocessing
(separating useful ﬁssile and fertile nuclear materials from the spent fuel of a reactor) in
India. Research reactors that have been subsequently commissioned include ZERLINA,
PURNIMA (I, II and III), DHRUVA and KAMINI. KAMINI is the country’s ﬁrst large research
reactor that uses U—233 as fuel. As the name suggests, the primary objective of a research
reactor is not generation of power but to provide a facility for research on different aspects
of nuclear science and technology. Research reactors are also an excellent source for
production of a variety of radioactive isotopes that ﬁnd application in diverse fields:
industry, medicine and agriculture.

The main objectives of the Indian Atomic Energy programme are to provide safe and
reliable electric power for the country’s social and economic progress and to be self-
reliant in all aspects of nuclear technology. Exploration of atomic minerals in India
undertaken since the early ﬁfties has indicated that India has limited reserves of uranium,
but fairly abundant reserves of thorium. Accordingly, our country has adopted a three-
stage strategy of nuclear power generation. The ﬁrst stage involves the use of natural
uranium as a fuel, with heavy water as moderator. The Plutonium-239 obtained from
reprocessing of the discharged fuel from the reactors then serves as a fuel for the second
stage — the fast breeder reactors. They are so called because they use fast neutrons for
sustaining the chain reaction (hence no moderator is needed) and, besides generating
power, also breed more ﬁssile species (plutonium) than they consume. The third stage,
most signiﬁcant in the long term, involves using fast breeder reactors to produce ﬁssile
Uranium-233 from Thorium-232 and to build power reactors based on them.

India is currently well into the second stage of the programme and considerable
work has also been done on the third — the thorium utilisation — stage. The country
has mastered the complex technologies of mineral exploration and mining, fuel
fabrication, heavy water production, reactor design, construction and operation, fuel
reprocessing, etc. Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs) built at different sites in
the country mark the accomplishment of the first stage of the programme. India is now
more than self-sufﬁcient in heavy water production. Elaborate safety measures both in
the design and operation of reactors, as also adhering to stringent standards of
radiological protection are the hallmark of the Indian Atomic Energy Programme.

produced, in some 3, etc. The extra neutrons in turn can initiate ﬁssion
processes, producing still more neutrons, and so on. This leads to the
possibility of a chain reaction, as was ﬁrst suggested by Enrico Fermi. If
the chain reaction is controlled suitably, we can get a steady energy 453

2019-20