Introduction

Periodic and oscillatory
motions

Simple harmonic motion

Simple harmonic motion

and uniform circular
motion

Velocity and acceleration
in simple harmonic motion

Force law for simple
harmonic motion

Energy in simple harmonic
motion

Some systems executing

simple harmonic motion

Damped simple harmonic
motion

Forced oscillations and
resonance

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises

Additional Exercises

 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

 

IIOS7CHI4

OSCILLATIONS

14. 1 INTRODUCTION

In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions.
You have already learnt about some of them, e. g., rectilinear
motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are
non-repetitive. We have also learnt about uniform circular
motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In
these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of
time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have
enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both
these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the
periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro
about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes
a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro
motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river, the
piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a
motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we
study this motion.

The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its
concepts are required for the understanding of many physical
phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar, the guitar
or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce
pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms
in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about
their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make
the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate
about their equilibrium positions, the average energi of
vibrations being proportional to temperature. AC power
supply give voltage that oscillates alternately going positive
and negative about the mean value (zero).

The description of a periodic motion, in general, and
oscillatory motion, in particular, requires some fundamental
concepts, like period, frequency, displacement, amplitude
and phase. These concepts are developed in the next section.

2019-20