DUOI Nature Of Radiation

and MOHer

energy of the emitted photoelectrons increases linearly with the
frequency of the incident radiation, but is independent of its intensity
(Fig. 1 1.5).

(iv) The photoelectric emission is an instantaneous process without any
apparent time lag (~ 1 O‘gs or less), even when the incident radiation is
made exceedingly dim.

1 1.5 PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT AND WAVE THEORY
OF LIGHT

The wave nature of light was well established by the end of the nineteenth
century. The phenomena of interference, diffraction and polarisation were
explained in a natural and satisfactory way by the wave picture of light.
According to this picture, light is an electromagnetic wave consisting of
electric and magnetic fields with continuous distribution of energy over
the region of space over which the wave is extended. Let us now see if this
wave picture of light can explain the observations on photoelectric
emission given in the previous section.

According to the wave picture of light, the free electrons at the surface
of the metal (over which the beam of radiation falls) absorb the radiant
energy continuously. The greater the intensity of radiation, the greater are
the amplitude of electric and magnetic fields. Consequently, the greater
the intensity, the greater should be the energy absorbed by each electron.
In this picture, the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons on the
surface is then expected to increase with increase in intensity. Also, no
matter what the frequency of radiation is, a sufficiently intense beam of
radiation (over sufficient time) should be able to impart enough energy to
the electrons, so that they exceed the minimum energy needed to escape
from the metal surface . A threshold frequency, therefore, should not exist.
These expectations of the wave theory directly contradict observations (i),
(ii) and (iii) given at the end of sub-section 1 1.4.3.

Further, we should note that in the wave picture, the absorption of
energy by electron takes place continuously over the entire
wavefront of the radiation. Since a large number of electrons absorb energy,
the energy absorbed per electron per unit time turns out to be small.
Explicit calculations estimate that it can take hours or more for a single
electron to pick up sufﬁcient energy to overcome the work function and
come out of the metal. This conclusion is again in striking contrast to
observation (iv) that the photoelectric emission is instantaneous. In short,
the wave picture is unable to explain the most basic features of
photoelectric emission.

1 1 .6 EINSTEIN’s PHOTOELECTRIC EQUATION: ENERGY

QUANTUM OF RADIATION

In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879- 1955) proposed a radically new picture
of electromagnetic radiation to explain photoelectric effect. In this picture,
photoelectric emission does not take place by continuous absorption of
energy from radiation. Radiation energy is built up of discrete units — the
so called quanta of energy of radiation. Each quantum of radiant energy

2019-20

393