i Physics

é”

(21}

/¢

FIGURE 6.6
Illustration of

210

(b)

Lenz’s law.

6.5 LENz’s LAW AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

In 1 834, German physicist Heinrich Friedrich Lenz (1 804- 1 865) deduced
a rule, known as Lenz’s law which gives the polarity of the induced emf
in a clear and concise fashion. The statement of the law is:

The polarity of induced emf is such that it tends to produce a current
which opposes the change in magnetic ﬂux that produced it.

The negative sign shown in Eq. (6.3) represents this effect. We can
understand Lenz’s law by examining Experiment 6.1 in Section 6.2.1. In
Fig. 6.1, we see that the North-pole of a bar magnet is being pushed
towards the closed coil. As the North-pole of the bar magnet moves towards
the coil, the magnetic ﬂux through the coil increases. Hence current is
induced in the coil in such a direction that it opposes the increase in ﬂux.
This is possible only if the current in the coil is in a counter-clockwise
direction with respect to an observer situated on the side of the magnet.
Note that magnetic moment associated with this current has North polarity
towards the North-pole of the approaching magnet. Similarly, if the North-
pole of the magnet is being withdrawn from the coil, the magnetic ﬂux
through the coil will decrease. To counter this decrease in magnetic ﬂux,
the induced current in the coil ﬂows in clockwise direction and its South-
pole faces the receding North-pole of the bar magnet. This would result in
an attractive force which opposes the motion of the magnet and the
corresponding decrease in ﬂux.

What will happen if an open circuit is used in place of the closed loop
in the above example? In this case too, an emf is induced across the open

ends of the circuit. The direction of the induced emf can be found
using Lenz’s law. Consider Figs. 6.6 (a) and (b). They provide an easier
way to understand the direction of induced currents. Note that the

direction shown by N and $ indicate the directions of the induced

currents.

A little reﬂection on this matter should convince us on the
correctness of Lenz’s law. Suppose that the induced current was in
the direction opposite to the one depicted in Fig. 6.6(a). In that case,
the South-pole due to the induced current will face the approaching
North-pole of the magnet. The bar magnet will then be attracted
towards the coil at an ever increasing acceleration. A gentle push on
the magnet will initiate the process and its velocity and kinetic energy
will continuously increase without expending any energy. If this can
happen, one could construct a perpetual-motion machine by a
suitable arrangement. This violates the law of conservation of energy
and hence can not happen.

Now consider the correct case shown in Fig. 6.6(a). In this situation,
the bar magnet experiences a repulsive force due to the induced
current. Therefore, a person has to do work in moving the magnet.
Where does the energy spent by the person go? This energy is

dissipated by Joule heating produced by the induced current.

2019-20