Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

available decorative lamp with ﬁne plastic ﬁbres with their free ends
forming a fountain like structure. The other end of the ﬁbres is fixed over
an electric lamp. When the lamp is switched on, the light travels from the
bottom of each ﬁbre and appears at the tip of its free end as a dot of light.
The ﬁbres in such decorative lamps are optical fibres.

The main requirement in fabricating optical fibres is that there should
be very little absorption of light as it travels for long distances inside
them. This has been achieved by puriﬁcation and special preparation of
materials such as quartz. In silica glass fibres, it is possible to transmit
more than 95% of the light over a ﬁbre length of 1 km. (Compare with
what you expect for a block of ordinary window glass 1 km thick.)

9.5 REFRACTION AT SPHERICAL SURFACES
AND BY LENSES

We have so far considered refraction at a plane interface. We shall now
consider refraction at a spherical interface between two transparent media.
An inﬁnitesimal part of a spherical surface can be regarded as planar
and the same laws of refraction can be applied at every point on the
surface. Just as for reﬂection by a spherical mirror, the normal at the
point of incidence is perpendicular to the tangent plane to the spherical
surface at that point and, therefore, passes through its centre of curvature.
We ﬁrst consider refraction by a single spherical surface and follow it by
thin lenses. A thin lens is a transparent optical medium bounded by two
surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical. Applying the formula
for image formation by a single spherical surface successively at the two
surfaces of a lens, we shall obtain the lens maker’s formula and then the
lens formula.

9.5. 1 Refraction at a spherical surface

Figure 9.1 7 shows the geometry of formation of image I of an object O on
the principal axis of a spherical surface with centre of curvature C, and
radius of curvature R. The rays are incident from a medium of refractive
index n1, to another of refractive index n2. As before, we take the aperture
(or the lateral size) of the surface to be small
compared to other distances involved, so that small
angle approximation can be made. In particular,
NM will be taken to be nearly equal to the length of
the perpendicular from the point N on the principal
axis. We have, for small angles,

 

t ANOM w
an ' OM
MN
tan ANCM — M—C
FIGURE 9.17 Refraction at a spherical
MN surface separating two media.
tan ANIM = m 323

2019-20