244

PHYSICS

9.6.5 POISSON'S RATIO

Careful observations with the Young’s modulus
experiment (explained in section 9.6.2), show
that there is also a slight reduction in the cross-
section (or in the diameter) of the wire. The strain
perpendicular to the applied force is called
lateral strain. Simon Poisson pointed out that
within the elastic limit, lateral strain is directly
proportional to the longitudinal strain. The ratio
of the lateral strain to the longitudinal strain in
a stretched wire is called Poisson’s ratio. If the
original diameter of the wire is d and the
contraction of the diameter under stress is Ad,
the lateral strain is Ad/d. If the original length
of the wire is L and the elongation under stress
is AL, the longitudinal strain is AL/ L. Poisson’s
ratio is then (Ad/ d) / (AL/ L) or (Ad/AL) X (L/d).
Poisson’s ratio is a ratio of two strains; it is a
pure number and has no dimensions or units.
Its value depends only on the nature of material.
For steels the value is between 0.28 and 0.30,
and for aluminium alloys it is about 0.33.

9.6.6 Elastic Potential Energy
in a Stretched Wire

When a wire is put under a tensile stress, work
is done against the inter-atomic forces. This
work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic
potential energy. When a wire of original length
L and area of cross-section A is subjected to a
deforming force F along the length of the wire,
let the length of the wire be elongated by I. Then
from Eq. (9.8), we have F= YA X (l/L). Here Yis
the Young’s modulus of the material of the wire.
Now for a further elongation of infinitesimal
small length dl, work done dWis F X dl or YAldl/
L. Therefore, the amount of work done (W) in
increasing the length of the wire from L to L + l,
thatis from l=0 to l= lis

lYAl YA 12
= —dl=— _
W Io L 2 XL

lex££T ><AL
W‘ 2 L

X Young’s modulus X strain2 X

_l
'2

volume of the wire

2019-20

1
= 5X stress X strain X volume of the

wire
This work is stored in the wire in the form of
elastic potential energy (U). Therefore the elastic
potential energy per unit volume of the wire (u) is

1
u= —><0'8 (9.15)

2

9.7 APPLICATIONS OF ELASTIC
BEHAVIOUR OF MATERIALS

The elastic behaviour of materials plays an
important role in everyday life. All engineering
designs require precise knowledge of the elastic
behaviour of materials. For example while
designing a building, the structural design of
the columns, beams and supports require
knowledge of strength of materials used. Have
you ever thought why the beams used in
construction of bridges, as supports etc. have
a cross-section of the type 1? Why does a heap
of sand or a hill have a pyramidal shape?
Answers to these questions can be obtained
from the study of structural engineering which
is based on concepts developed here.

Cranes used for lifting and moving heavy
loads from one place to another have a thick
metal rope to which the load is attached. The
rope is pulled up using pulleys and motors.
Suppose we want to make a crane, which has
a lifting capacity of 10 tonnes or metric tons (1
metric ton = 1000 kg). How thick should the
steel rope be? We obviously want that the load
does not deform the rope permanently.
Therefore, the extension should not exceed the
elastic limit. From Table 9.1, we find that mild
steel has a yield strength (0y) of about 300 x
106 N m‘2. Thus, the area of cross-section (A)
of the rope should at least be

A2 W/oy = Mg/oy (9.16)
= (104 kgx 9.8 m s‘2)/(300 x 106 N m'2)
= 3.3 x 10‘4 m2

corresponding to a radius of about 1 cm for
a rope of circular cross-section. Generally
a large margin of safety (of about a factor of
ten in the load) is provided. Thus a thicker
rope of radius about 3 cm is recommended.
A single wire of this radius would practically
be a rigid rod. So the ropes are always made
of a number of thin wires braided together,