Magnetism and

 

Mutter

Because of its practical application in prospecting, communication, and navigation, the
magnetic ﬁeld of the earth is mapped by most nations with an accuracy comparable to
geographical mapping. In India over a dozen observatories exist, extending from
Trivandrum (now Thrivuvananthapuram) in the south to Gulmarg in the north. These
observatories work under the aegis of the Indian Institute of Geomagnetism (IIG), in Colaba,
Mumbai. The IIG grew out of the Colaba and Alibag observatories and was formally
established in 197 1. The IIG monitors (via its nation-wide observatories), the geomagnetic
fields and ﬂuctuations on land, and under the ocean and in space. Its services are used
by the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC), the National Institute of
Oceanography (N10) and the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). It is a part of
the world-wide network which ceaselessly updates the geomagnetic data. Now India has
a permanent station called Gangotri.

SUMMARY

1. The science of magnetism is old. It has been known since ancient times
that magnetic materials tend to point in the north—south direction; like
magnetic poles repel and unlike ones attract; and cutting a bar magnet
in two leads to two smaller magnets. Magnetic poles cannot be isolated.

2. When a bar magnet of dipole moment m is placed in a uniform magnetic
field B,
(a) the force on it is zero,
[b] the torque on it is m X B,
(c) its potential energy is —m-B, where we choose the zero of energy at
the orientation when m is perpendicular to B.

3. Consider a bar magnet of size land magnetic moment m, at a distance
r from its mid—point, where r >>l, the magnetic field B due to this bar
is,

 

 

,u m
B = 2213 [along axis}
= — :0“; (along equator)
1: r

4. Gauss’s law for magnetism states that the net magnetic ﬂux through
any closed surface is zero

(pH: 2 BoAS=O

all area
elements AS

5. The earth’s magnetic field resembles that of a (hypothetical) magnetic
dipole located at the centre of the earth. The pole near the geographic
north pole of the earth is called the north magnetic pole. Similarly, the
pole near the geographic south pole is called the south magnetic pole.
This dipole is aligned making a small angle with the rotation axis of
the earth. The magnitude of the ﬁeld on the earth’s surface 2 4 X 10"5 T. 197

2019-20