CHAPTER EIGHT

 

| I 0860-108

8.1
8.2
8.3

8.4

8.5

8.6

Introduction
Kepler's laws

Universal law of
gravitation

The gravitational
constant

Acceleration clue to
gravity of the earth
Acceleration clue to
gravity below and above
the surface of earth

Gravitational potential
energy

Escape speed
Earth satellites

Energy of an orbiting
satellite

Geostationary and polar
satellites

Weightlessness

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises

 

GRAVITATION

 

8. 1 INTRODUCTION

Early in our lives, we become aware of the tendency of all
material objects to be attracted towards the earth. Anything
thrown up falls down towards the earth, going uphill is lot
more tiring than going downhill, raindrops from the clouds
above fall towards the earth and there are many other such
phenomena. Historically it was the Italian Physicist Galileo
(1564- l 642) who recognised the fact that all bodies,
irrespective of their masses, are accelerated towards the earth
with a constant acceleration. It is said that he made a public
demonstration of this fact. To find the truth, he certainly did
experiments with bodies rolling down inclined planes and
arrived at a value of the acceleration due to gravity which is
close to the more accurate value obtained later.

A seemingly unrelated phenomenon, observation of stars,
planets and their motion has been the subject of attention in
many countries since the earliest of times. Observations since
early times recognised stars which appeared in the sky with
positions unchanged year after year. The more interesting
objects are the planets which seem to have regular motions
against the background of stars. The earliest recorded model
for planetary motions proposed by Ptolemy about 2000 years
ago was a ‘geocentric’ model in which all celestial objects,
stars, the sun and the planets, all revolved around the earth.
The only motion that was thought to be possible for celestial
objects was motion in a circle. Complicated schemes of motion
were put forward by Ptolemy in order to describe the observed
motion of the planets. The planets were described as moving
in circles with the centre of the circles themselves moving in
larger circles. Similar theories were also advanced by Indian
astronomers some 400 years later. However a more elegant
model in which the Sun was the centre around which the
planets revolved — the ‘heliocentric’ model — was already
mentioned by Aryabhatta (5th century AD.) in his treatise. A
thousand years later, a Polish monk named Nicolas

2019-20