178

7.1

7.2

7.3

7.4

7.5

7.6

7.7

7.8

7.9

7. 10

PHYSICS

EXERCISES

Give the location of the centre of mass of a [i] sphere, [ii] cylinder, [iii] ring, and (iv)
cube, each of uniform mass density. Does the centre of mass of a body necessarily
lie inside the body ?

In the HCl molecule, the separation between the nuclei of the two atoms is about
1.27 A (1 A = 10‘10 m]. Find the approximate location of the CM of the molecule,
given that a chlorine atom is about 35.5 times as massive as a hydrogen atom and
nearly all the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus.

A child sits stationary at one end of a long trolley moving uniformly with a speed V
on a smooth horizontal ﬂoor. If the child gets up and runs about on the trolley in any
manner, what is the speed of the CM of the (trolley + child] system ?

Show that the area of the triangle contained between the vectors a and b is one half
of the magnitude of aXb.

Show that a.(b><c] is equal in magnitude to the volume of the parallelepiped formed
on the three vectors , a, b and c.

Find the components along the x, y, z axes of the angular momentum l of a particle,
whose position vector is r with components x, y, z and momentum is p with
components px, py and pl. Show that if the particle moves only in the x—y plane the
angular momentum has only a z—component.

Two particles, each of mass mand speed v, travel in opposite directions along parallel
lines separated by a distance (1. Show that the angular momentum vector of the two
particle system is the same whatever be the point about which the angular momentum
is taken.

A non—uniform bar of weight W is suspended at rest by two strings of negligible
weight as shown in Fig.7.39. The angles made by the strings with the vertical are
36.9° and 53.1° respectively. The bar is 2 m long. Calculate the distance d of the
centre of gravity of the bar from its left end.

 

Fig. 7.39

A car weighs 1800 kg. The distance between its front and back axles is 1.8 m. Its
centre of gravity is 1.05 m behind the front axle. Determine the force exerted by the
level ground on each front wheel and each back wheel.

(a) Find the moment of inertia of a sphere about a tangent to the sphere, given the
moment of inertia of the sphere about any of its diameters to be 2MR’1/5, where
M is the mass of the sphere and R is the radius of the sphere.

[b] Given the moment of inertia of a disc of mass M and radius R about any of its
diameters to be MR2/ 4, find its moment of inertia about an axis normal to the
disc and passing through a point on its edge.

2019-20