Electrostatic Potential
and Copoci’ronce

electric ﬁeld normal to the surface exists; this means potential will be
different for the surface and a point just outside the surface.

In a system of conductors of arbitrary size, shape and
charge configuration, each conductor is characterised by a constant
value of potential, but this constant may differ from one conductor to
the other.

5. Electric ﬁeld at the surface of a charged conductor

E = —n

80 (2.35)
where o is the surface charge density and I1 is a unit vector normal
to the surface in the outward direction.

To derive the result, choose a pill box (a short cylinder) as the Gaussian
surface about any point P on the surface, as shown in Fig. 2.1 7. The pill
box is partly inside and partly outside the surface of the conductor. It
has a small area of cross section (SS and negligible height.

Just inside the surface, the electrostatic ﬁeld is zero; just outside, the
ﬁeld is normal to the surface with magnitude E. Thus,
the contribution to the total ﬂux through the pill box
comes only from the outside (circular) cross-section
of the pill box. This equals i E58 (positive for 6 > 0,
negative for a < 0), since over the small area 68, E
may be considered constant and E and ES are parallel
or antiparallel. The charge enclosed by the pill box
is 665.

 

 

By Gauss’s law surface charge Surface of
density 0 Conductor
6 S
E65 = M
80
E = M (2.36)
80
Including the fact that electric field is normal to the FIGURE 2_ 17 The Gaussian surface
surface, we get the vector relation, Eq. (2.35), which (a pill box) chosen to derive Eq. (2.35)
is true for both signs of G. For o> 0, electric ﬁeld is for electric field at the surface of a
normal to the surface outward; for a < 0, electric ﬁeld ChargEd COHdUCtOl‘-

is normal to the surface inward.

6. Electrostatic shielding

Consider a conductor with a cavity, with no charges inside the cavity. A
remarkable result is that the electric ﬁeld inside the cavity is zero, whatever
be the size and shape of the cavity and whatever be the charge on the
conductor and the external ﬁelds in which it might be placed. We have
proved a simple case of this result already: the electric ﬁeld inside a charged
spherical shell is zero. The proof of the result for the shell makes use of
the spherical symmetry of the shell (see Chapter 1). But the vanishing of
electric field in the (charge-free) cavity of a conductor is, as mentioned
above, a very general result. A related result is that even if the conductor 69

2019-20