Duol Nature of Radiation

and Moi-fer

A photocell is a technological application of the photoelectric effect. It is a device whose
electrical properties are affected by light. It is also sometimes called an electric eye. A photocell
consists of a semi-cylindrical photo-sensitive metal plate C (emitter) and a wire loop A
(collector) supported in an evacuated glass or quartz bulb. It is connected to the external
circuit having a high-tension battery B and microammeter (uA) as shown in the Figure.
Sometimes, instead of the plate C, a thin layer of photosensitive material is pasted on the
inside of the bulb. A part of the bulb is left clean for the light to enter it.

When light of suitable wavelength falls on the
emitter C, photoelectrons are emitted. These
photoelectrons are drawn to the collector A.
Photocurrent of the order of a few microampere
can be normally obtained from a photo cell.

A photocell converts a change in intensity of
illumination into a change in photocurrent. This
current can be used to operate control systems
and in light measuring devices. A photocell of lead
sulphide sensitive to infrared radiation is used
in electronic ignition circuits.

In scientific work, photo cells are used
whenever it is necessary to measure the intensity
of light. Light meters in photographic cameras
make use of photo cells to measure the intensity
of incident light. The photocells, inserted in the
door light electric circuit, are used as automatic
door opener. A person approaching a doorway 0 ”A
may interrupt a light beam which is incident on
a photocell. The abrupt change in photocurrent
may be used to start a motor which opens the
door or rings an alarm. They are used in the
control of a counting device which records every interruption of the light beam caused by a
person or object passing across the beam. So photocells help count the persons entering an
auditorium, provided they enter the hall one by one. They are used for detection of trafﬁc
law defaulters: an alarm may be sounded whenever a beam of (invisible) radiation is
intercepted.

In burglar alarm, (invisible) ultraviolet light is continuously made to fall on a photocell
installed at the doorway. A person entering the door interrupts the beam falling on the
photocell. ’Ihe abrupt change in photocurrent is used to start an electric bell ringing. In ﬁre
alarm, a number of photocells are installed at suitable places in a building. In the event of
breaking out of fire, light radiations fall upon the photocell. This completes the electric
circuit through an electric bell or a siren which starts operating as a warning signal.

Photocells are used in the reproduction of sound in motion pictures and in the television
camera for scanning and telecasting scenes. They are used in industries for detecting minor

ﬂaws or holes in metal sheets. i

_ —34

    

Incident light

Collector

Emitter

A photo cell

p=mv=0.l2kg><20ms‘1=2.4Okgms‘1

6.63x10‘34J s

,4-
_ p _ 2.40 kgms‘1

2019-20