372

 

 

l Physics

 

In this experiment, the ﬁlament plays the role of the first slit 8 in
Fig. 10.16. The lens of the eye focuses the pattern on the screen (the
retina of the eye).

With some effort, one can cut a double slit in an aluminium foil with
a blade. The bulb filament can be viewed as before to repeat Young’s
experiment. In daytime, there is another suitable bright source subtending
a small angle at the eye. This is the reﬂection of the Sun in any shiny
convex surface (e. g., a cycle bell). Do not try direct sunlight — it can damage
the eye and will not give fringes anyway as the Sun subtends an angle
of (1 / 2)°.

In interference and diffraction, light energy is redistributed. If it
reduces in one region, producing a dark fringe, it increases in another
region, producing a bright fringe. There is no gain or loss of energy,
which is consistent with the principle of conservation of energy.

10.6.3 Resolving power of optical instruments

In Chapter 9 we had discussed about telescopes. The angular resolution
of the telescope is determined by the objective of the telescope. The stars
which are not resolved in the image produced by the objective cannot be
resolved by any further magniﬁcation produced by the eyepiece. The
primary purpose of the eyepiece is to provide magnification of the image
produced by the objective.

Consider a parallel beam of light falling on a convex lens. If the lens is
well corrected for aberrations, then geometrical optics tells us that the
beam will get focused to a point. However, because of diffraction, the
beam instead of getting focused to a point gets focused to a spot of finite
area. In this case the effects due to diffraction can be taken into account
by considering a plane wave incident on a circular aperture followed by
a convex lens (Fig. 10.19). The analysis of the corresponding diffraction
pattern is quite involved; however, in principle, it is similar to the analysis
carried out to obtain the single-slit diffraction pattern. Taking into account
the effects due to diffraction, the pattern on the focal plane would consist
of a central bright region surrounded by concentric dark and bright rings
(Fig. 10. 19). A detailed analysis shows that the radius of the central bright
region is approximately given by

~ 1.22/if _ 0.61/if
2a a

l

2a

l

FIGURE 10.19 A parallel beam of light is incident on a convex lens.
Because of diffraction effects. the beam gets focused to a
spot of radius : 0.61 xlf/a.

 

r0 (10.24)

  

<—f—>

2019-20