l Physics

ROGET’S SPIRAL FOR ATTRACTION BETWEEN PARALLEL CURRENTS

Magnetic effects are generally smaller than electric effects. As a consequence, the force
between currents is rather small, because of the smallness of the factor ,u. Hence it is
difficult to demonstrate attraction or repulsion between currents. Thus, for 5 A current
in each wire at a separation of 1cm, the force per metre would be 5 X 1041 N, which is
about 50 mg weight. It would be like pulling a wire by a string going over a pulley to
which a 50 mg weight is attached. The displacement of the wire would be quite
unnoticeable.

With the use of a soft spring, we can increase the effective length of the parallel current
and by using mercury, we can make the displacement of even a few mm observable very
dramatically. You will also need a constant-current
supply giving a constant current of about 5 A.

Take a soft spring whose natural period of
oscillations is about 0.5 — 1s. Hang it vertically and
some attach a pointed tip to its lower end, as shown in the

1 ﬁgure here. Take some mercury in a dish and adjust the
spring such that the tip is just above the mercury
(J surface. Take the DC current source, connect one of its
U—mmm’ terminals to the upper end of the spring, and dip the
other terminal in mercury. If the tip of the spring touches

mercury, the circuit is completed through mercury.

Let the DC source be put off to begin with. Let the tip be adjusted so that it just
touches the mercury surface. Switch on the constant current supply, and watch the
fascinating outcome. The spring shrinks with a j erk, the tip comes out of mercury (just
by a m or so), the circuit is broken, the current stops, the spring relaxes and tries to
come back to its original position, the tip again touches mercury establishing a current
in the circuit, and the cycle continues with tick, tick, tick, . .. In the beginning, you may
require some small adjustments to get a good effect.

Keep your face away from mercury vapour as it is poisonous. Do not inhale mercury

vapour for long.

Example 4.10 The horizontal component of the earth’s magnetic field
at a certain place is 3.0 ><10‘5 T and the direction of the field is from
the geographic south to the geographic north. A very long straight
conductor is carrying a steady current of 1A. What is the force per
unit length on it when it is placed on a horizontal table and the
direction of the current is (a) east to west; (b) south to north?

Solution F = I l X B
F = [18 sine
The force per unit length is
f= F/l= IBsinQ
(a) When the current is ﬂowing from east to west,
0 = 90°
Hence,
f = I B
= 1 x3x 10t5=3x 105an1

Current

EXAMPLE 4. 10

156

2019-20