Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

this case is to be taken as normal to the tangent Normal

to surface at the point of incidence. That is, the Incident ray Reﬂected ray
normal is along the radius, the line joining the l
centre of curvature of the mirror to the point of
incidence.

We have already studied that the geometric
centre of a spherical mirror is called its pole while
that of a spherical lens is called its optical centre.
The line joining the pole and the centre of curvature
of the spherical mirror is known as the principal .
axis. In the case of spherical lenses, the principal FIGURE 9.1 The incident ray. reﬂected ray
axis is the linejoining the Optical centre With its and the nomial to the reflecting surface lie
principal focus as you will see later. in the same Plane-

 

9.2. 1 Sign convention

To derive the relevant formulae for reﬂection by spherical mirrors and
refraction by spherical lenses, we must first adopt a sign convention for
measuring distances. In this book, we shall follow the Cartesian sign
convention. According to this

convention, all distances are measured Object on left Mirror
from the pole of the mirror or the optical

centre of the lens. The distances Heights “1°1de light
measured in the same direction as the upwards]

   
 
   

incident light are taken as positive and posmve

those measured in the direction l ’X‘a’ﬂs

 

opposite to the direction of incident Distances against
light are taken as negative (Fig. 9.2). incident light
The heights measured upwards with Heights negative _,
respect to x—axis and normal to the downwards Distances along
principal axis (x—axis) of the mirror/ negative inCidev’Elight
lens are taken as positive (Fig. 9.2). The posmve

heights meaSPred downwards are FIGURE 9.2 The Cartesian Sign Convention.
taken as negative.

With a common accepted convention, it turns out that a single formula
for spherical mirrors and a single formula for spherical lenses can handle
all different cases.

9.2.2 Focal length of spherical mirrors

Figure 9.3 shows what happens when a parallel beam of light is incident
on (a) a concave mirror, and (b) a convex mirror. We assume that the rays
are paraxial, i.e., they are incident at points close to the pole P of the mirror
and make small angles with the principal axis. The reﬂected rays converge
at a point F on the principal axis of a concave mirror [Fig. 9.3(a)].
For a convex mirror, the reﬂected rays appear to diverge from a point F
on its principal axis [Fig. 9.3(b)]. The point F is called the principal focus
of the mirror. If the parallel paraxial beam of light were incident, making
some angle with the principal axis, the reﬂected rays would converge (or
appear to diverge) from a point in a plane through F normal to the principal
axis. This is called the focal plane of the mirror [Fig. 9.3(c)]. 3 1 1

2019-20