Building energy per nucleon [MeV)

444

 

 

l Physics

 

in the process. The energy Eb is called the binding energy of the nucleus.
If we separate a nucleus into its nucleons, we would have to supply a
total energy equal to Eb, to those particles. Although we cannot tear
apart a nucleus in this way, the nuclear binding energy is still a convenient
measure of how well a nucleus is held together. A more useful measure
of the binding between the constituents of the nucleus is the binding
energy per nucleon, Eb”, which is the ratio of the binding energy Eb of a
nucleus to the number of the nucleons, A, in that nucleus:

E = Eb/A (13.9)

bn
We can think of binding energy per nucleon as the average energy

per nucleon needed to separate a nucleus into its individual nucleons.
Figure 13.1 is a plot of the

binding energy per nucleon Elm

 

versus the mass number A for a
large number of nuclei. We notice

 

 

the following main features of

the plot:

(i) the binding energy per
nucleon, Ebn, is practically
constant, i.e. practically
independent of the atomic
number for nuclei of middle
mass number ( 3O <A< 170).

 

 

 

 

 

 

100 150 200 250 The curve has a maximum of
about 8.75 MeV for A = 56

M b A
ass Hum 6“ ) and has a value of 7.6 MeV

FIGURE 13.1 The. binding energy per nucleon forA= 238.
as a function of mass number. (ii) E

bn is lower for both light
nuclei (A<30) and heavy
nuclei (A> l 70).
We can draw some conclusions from these two observations:
(i) The force is attractive and sufficiently strong to produce a binding
energy of a few MeV per nucleon.
(ii) The constancy of the binding energy in the range 30 < A < 170 is a
consequence of the fact that the nuclear force is short-ranged. Consider
a particular nucleon inside a sufﬁciently large nucleus. It will be under
the inﬂuence of only some of its neighbours, which come within the
range of the nuclear force. If any other nucleon is at a distance more
than the range of the nuclear force from the particular nucleon it will
have no inﬂuence on the binding energy of the nucleon under
consideration. If a nucleon can have a maximum of p neighbours
within the range of nuclear force, its binding energy would be
proportional to p. Let the binding energy of the nucleus be pk, where
k is a constant having the dimensions of energy. If we increase A by
adding nucleons they will not change the binding energy of a nucleon
inside. Since most of the nucleons in a large nucleus reside inside it
and not on the surface, the change in binding energy per nucleon
would be small. The binding energy per nucleon is a constant and is
approximately equal to pk. The property that a given nucleon

2019-20