R to Fig. 2.1, this will happen if Q and q are both positive
II or both negative. For definiteness, let us take Q, q > 0.
Two remarks may be made here. First, we assume

6} that the test charge q is so small that it does not disturb
Q the original configuration, namely the charge Q at the
origin (or else, we keep Q fixed at the origin by some

FIGURE 2_1 A test charge (1 (> 0) is unspeciﬁed force). Second, inbringing the charge qfrom

moved from the point R to the R to P, we apply an external force Fext just enough to

point P against the repulsive counter the repulsive electric force FE (i.e, Fem: —FE).

force on it by the charge Q (> O) This means there is no net force on or acceleration of
placed at the origin. the charge q when it is brought from R to P, i.e., it is

brought with infinitesimally slow constant speed. In
this situation, work done by the external force is the negative of the work
done by the electric force, and gets fully stored in the form of potential
energy of the charge q. If the external force is removed on reaching P, the
electric force will take the charge away from Q — the stored energy (potential
energy) at P is used to provide kinetic energy to the charge q in such a
way that the sum of the kinetic and potential energies is conserved.
Thus, work done by external forces in moving a charge q from R to P is

= —IFE-dr (2-1)

This work done is against electrostatic repulsive force and gets stored
as potential energy.

At every point in electric field, a particle with charge q possesses a
certain electrostatic potential energy, this work done increases its potential
energy by an amount equal to potential energy difference between points

R and P.
Thus, potential energy difference
AU 2 UP —UR = WRP (2.2)

(Note here that this displacement is in an opposite sense to the electric
force and hence work done by electric field is negative, i.e., —WRP.)

Therefore, we can define electric potential energy difference between
two points as the work required to be done by an external force in moving

(without accelerating) charge q from one point to another for electric field

of any arbitrary charge configuration.

Two important comments may be made at this stage:

(i) The right side of Eq. (2.2) depends only on the initial and final positions
of the charge. It means that the work done by an electrostatic field in
moving a charge from one point to another depends only on the initial
and the final points and is independent of the path taken to go from
one point to the other. This is the fundamental characteristic of a
conservative force. The concept of the potential energy would not be
meaningful if the work depended on the path. The path-independence
of work done by an electrostatic field can be proved using the

52 Coulomb’s law. We omit this proof here.

2019-20