i Physics

4.4 MOTION IN COMBINED ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC
FIELDS

4.4. 1 Velocity selector

You know that a charge q moving with velocity v in presence of both
electric and magnetic fields experiences a force given by Eq. (4.3), that is,

F=q(E+va) =FE+FB
We shall consider the simple case in which electric and magnetic

ﬁelds are perpendicular to each other and also perpendicular to
the velocity of the particle, as shown in Fig. 4.7. We have,

E=Ej,B=Bk,v=vi
FE=qE=qu,FB=quB,=q(viXBk)=—qBj

Therefore, F = q(E — vB) J .

Thus, electric and magnetic forces are in opposite directions as
shown in the figure. Suppose, we adjust the value of E and B such
that magnitudes of the two forces are equal. Then, total force on
FIGURE 4.7 the charge is zero and the charge will move in the fields undeﬂected.
This happens when,

x

 

E
qE = qu or v = E (4.7)

This condition can be used to select charged particles of a particular
velocity out Of a beam containing charges moving with different speeds
(irrespective of their charge and mass). The crossed E and B ﬁelds, therefore,
serve as a velocity selector. Only particles with speed E/ B pass
undeﬂected through the region of crossed fields. This method was
employed by J. J. Thomson in 1897 to measure the charge to mass ratio
(e/ m) of an electron. The principle is also employed in Mass Spectrometer —
a device that separates charged particles, usually ions, according to their
charge to mass ratio.

33.0

4.4.2 Cyclotron

The cyclotron is a machine to accelerate charged particles or ions to high
energies. It was invented by ED. Lawrence and MS. Livingston in 1 934
to investigate nuclear structure. The cyclotron uses both electric and
magnetic fields in combination to increase the energy of charged particles.
As the fields are perpendicular to each other they are called crossed
ﬁelds. Cyclotron uses the fact that the frequency of revolution of the
charged particle in a magnetic field is independent of its energy. The
particles move most of the time inside two semicircular disc-like metal
containers, D1 and D2, which are called dees as they look like the letter
D. Figure 4.8 shows a schematic view of the cyclotron. Inside the metal
boxes the particle is shielded and is not acted on by the electric field. The
7 magnetic field, however, acts on the particle and makes it go round in a
"“’ circular path inside a dee. Every time the particle moves from one dee to
another it is acted upon by the electric field. The sign of the electric field
is changed alternately in tune with the circular motion of the particle.
This ensures that the particle is always accelerated by the electric field.
Each time the acceleration increases the energy of the particle. As energy

http://www. p hy.ntn u .edulw/ntnujava/i ndex.php?t0pic

E
.9
d—D
g
U)
C
o
E
o
'0
=0)
0.2
2:2:
SE

 

140

2019-20