146

PHYSICS

 

small, we can treat the body as a continuous
distribution of mass. We subdivide the body into
n small elements of mass; Aml, A1712..- Amn; the
1“Lh element Amiis taken to be located about the
point (xi, yi, 29- The coordinates of the centre of
mass are then approximately given by

A . . A . . A . .
X_ Z( W. ,Y_ Z( mJy. ,Z_ Z( m.)z.
ZAmi ZAmi ZN“:
As we make n bigger and bigger and each
Ami smaller and smaller, these expressions

become exact. In that case, we denote the sums
over iby integrals. Thus,

ZAmi —>Idm=M,

 

 

Z (Ami)xi —> Ix dm,

2 (Ami)yi —> Iydm,

and Z (Ami)zi —> [2 dm

Here M is the total mass of the body. The
coordinates of the centre of mass now are

x: i
M
The vector expression equivalent to these

three scalar expressions is

J-xdm,Y= ﬁ J-ydmand ZzﬁJ-zdm (7.5a)

R=ﬁjrdm (75b)

If we choose, the centre of mass as the origin
of our coordinate system,

R=0
i.e.,Irdm=0
or dem=Iydm=Izdm=O (7.6)

Often we have to calculate the centre of mass
of homogeneous bodies of regular shapes like
rings, discs, spheres, rods etc. (By a
homogeneous body we mean a body with
uniformly distributed mass.) By using symmetry
consideration, we can easily show that the
centres of mass of these bodies lie at their
geometric centres.

dm dm

 

Fig. 7.8 Detemining the CM of a thin rod.

2019-20

Let us consider a thin rod, whose width and
breath (in case the cross section of the rod is
rectangular) or radius (in case the cross section
of the rod is cylindrical) is much smaller than
its length. Taking the origin to be at the
geometric centre of the rod and x—axis to be
along the length of the rod, we can say that on
account of reﬂection symmetry, for every
element dm of the rod at x, there is an element
of the same mass dm located at —x (Fig. 7 .8).

The net contribution of every such pair to

the integral and hence the integral dem itself

is zero. From Eq. (7.6), the point for which the
integral itself is zero, is the centre of mass.
Thus, the centre of mass of a homogenous thin
rod coincides with its geometric centre. This can
be understood on the basis of reﬂection symmetry.

The same symmetry argument will apply to
homogeneous rings, discs, spheres, or even
thick rods of circular or rectangular cross
section. For all such bodies you will realise that
for every element dm at a point (x, y, 2) one can
always take an element of the same mass at
the point (—x, —y, —z). (In other words, the origin
is a point of reﬂection symmetry for these
bodies.) As a result, the integrals in Eq. (7.5 a)
all are zero. This means that for all the above
bodies, their centre of mass coincides with their
geometric centre.

p Example 7.1 Find the centre of mass of
three particles at the vertices of an
equilateral triangle. The masses of the

particles are 100g, 150g, and 200g
respectively. Each side of the equilateral
triangle is 0.5m long.

 

Answer

200 g B(o.2s,o.25/§)

(025,0) A(0.5,0)

 

Fig. 7.9