236

PIIYSICS

 

elastic behaviour and mechanical properties of
solids which would answer many such
questions.

9.2 ELASTIC BEHAVIOUR OF SOLIDS

We know that in a solid, each atom or molecule
is surrounded by neighbouring atoms or
molecules. These are bonded together by
interatomic or intermolecular forces and stay
in a stable equilibrium position. When a solid is
deformed, the atoms or molecules are displaced
from their equilibrium positions causing a
change in the interatomic (or intermolecular)
distances. When the deforming force is removed,
the interatomic forces tend to drive them back
to their original positions. Thus the body regains
its original shape and size. The restoring
mechanism can be visualised by taking a model
of spring-ball system shown in the Fig. 9.1. Here
the balls represent atoms and springs represent
interatomic forces.

\))))))))))))))))))))

V
V
V
s
v
.‘-’

Iv(

))I

 

Fig. 9. 1 Spring-ball model for the illustration of elastic
behaviour of solids.

If you try to displace any ball from its
equilibrium position, the spring system tries to
restore the ball back to its original position. Thus
elastic behaviour of solids can be explained in
terms of microscopic nature of the solid. Robert
Hooke, an English physicist (1635 - 1703 AD)
performed experiments on springs and found
that the elongation (change in the length)
produced in a body is proportional to the applied
force or load. In 167 6, he presented his law of

2019-20

elasticity, now called Hooke’s law. We shall
study about it in Section 9.4. This law, like
Boyle’s law, is one of the earliest quantitative
relationships in science. It is very important to
know the behaviour of the materials under
various kinds of load from the context of
engineering design.

9.3 STRESS AND STRAIN

When forces are applied on a body in such a
manner that the body is still in static equilibrium,
it is deformed to a small or large extent depending
upon the nature of the material of the body and
the magnitude of the deforming force. The
deformation may not be noticeable visually in
many materials but it is there. When a body is
subjected to a deforming force, a restoring force
is developed in the body. This restoring force is
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to
the applied force. The restoring force per unit area
is known as stress. IfFis the force applied normal
to the cross—section and A is the area of cross
section of the body,
Magnitude of the stress = F/A (9.1)
The SI unit of stress is N m‘2 or pascal (Pa)
and its dimensional formula is [ ML‘I’I“2 ].
There are three ways in which a solid may
change its dimensions when an external force
acts on it. These are shown in Fig. 9.2. In
Fig.9.2(a), a cylinder is stretched by two equal
forces applied normal to its cross-sectional area.
The restoring force per unit area in this case
is called tensile stress. If the cylinder is
compressed under the action of applied forces,
the restoring force per unit area is known as
compressive stress. Tensile or compressive
stress can also be termed as longitudinal stress.
In both the cases, there is a change in the
length of the cylinder. The change in the length
AL to the original length L of the body (cylinder
in this case) is known as longitudinal strain.

AL
Longitudinal strain = T (9.2)

However, if two equal and opposite deforming
forces are applied parallel to the cross-sectional
area of the cylinder, as shown in Fig. 9.2(b),
there is relative displacement between the
opposite faces of the cylinder. The restoring force
per unit area developed due to the applied
tangential force is known as tangential or
shearing stress.