I Physics

 

where q) is the equilibrium deﬂection and k the torsion constant of
the spring.

1 1. An electron moving around the central nucleus has a magnetic moment
,ul given by:

_e

— 1
2m

#1

where lis the magnitude of the angular momentum of the circulating
electron about the central nucleus. The smallest value of ,ul is called
the Bohr magneton [.tB and it is [.tB = 9.27><10‘24 J /T

12. A moving coil galvanometer can be converted into a ammeter by
introducing a shunt resistance rs, of small value in parallel. It can be
converted into a voltmeter by introducing a resistance of a large value
in series.

   

Physical Quantity Symbol Nature Dimensions Units Remarks

[MLT'2A’2] 47: x 10'7 T m A’1
[M T'2A'1]
[LZA]
[M L2T‘2] Appears in MCG

   

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Electrostatic ﬁeld lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a
negative charge or fade at infinity. Magnetic field lines always form
closed loops.

2. The discussion in this Chapter holds only for steady currents which do
not vary with time.

When currents vary with time Newton’s third law is valid only if momentum
carried by the electromagnetic ﬁeld is taken into account.

3. Recall the expression for the Lorentz force.

F=q(v><B+E)

This velocity dependent force has occupied the attention of some of the
greatest scientiﬁc thinkers. If one switches to a frame with instantaneous
velocity v. the magnetic part of the force vanishes. The motion of the
charged particle is then explained by arguing that there exists an
appropriate electric field in the new frame. We shall not discuss the
details of this mechanism. However, we stress that the resolution of this
paradox implies that electricity and magnetism are linked phenomena
(electromagnetism) and that the Lorentz force expression does not imply
a universal preferred frame of reference in nature.

4. Ampere’s Circuital law is not independent of the Biot-Savart law. It
can be derived from the Biot-Savart law. Its relationship to the
Biot-Savart law is similar to the relationship between Gauss’s law and

1 68 Coulomb’s law.

2019-20