Magnetism and
Moﬁer

The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) of a paramagnetic material
possess a permanent magnetic dipole moment of their own. On account
of the ceaseless random thermal motion of the atoms, no net magnetisation
is seen. In the presence of an external field BO, which is strong enough,
and at low temperatures, the individual atomic dipole moment can be
made to align and point in the same direction as BO. Figure 5.12(b) shows
a bar of paramagnetic material placed in an external ﬁeld. The ﬁeld lines
gets concentrated inside the material, and the ﬁeld inside is enhanced. In
most cases, as is evident from Table 5.2, this enhancement is slight, being
one part in 105. When placed in a non-uniform magnetic ﬁeld, the bar
will tend to move from weak ﬁeld to strong.

Some paramagnetic materials are aluminium, sodium, calcium,
oxygen (at STP) and copper chloride. Experimentally, one ﬁnds that the
magnetisation of a paramagnetic material is inversely proportional to the
absolute temperature T,

BO
M_c7: w2mw

or equivalently, using Eqs. (5.12) and (5.17)

__&
z _ C T [5.20031]

This is known as Curie ’3 law, after its discoverer Pieree Curie (1859-
1906). The constant C is called Curie ’s constant. Thus, for a paramagnetic
material both x and ,ur depend not only on the material, but also
(in a simple fashion) on the sample temperature. As the field is
increased or the temperature is lowered, the magnetisation increases until
it reaches the saturation value Ms, at which point all the dipoles are
perfectly aligned with the ﬁeld. Beyond this, Curie’s law [Eq. (5.20)] is no
longer valid.

5.6.3 Ferromagnetism

Ferromagnetic substances are those which gets strongly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld. They have strong tendency to move
from a region of weak magnetic ﬁeld to strong magnetic ﬁeld, i.e., they get
strongly attracted to a magnet.

The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) in a ferromagnetic material
possess a dipole moment as in a paramagnetic material. However, they
interact with one another in such a way that they spontaneously align
themselves in a common direction over a macroscopic volume called
domain. The explanation of this cooperative effect requires quantum
mechanics and is beyond the scope of this textbook. Each domain has a
net magnetisation. Typical domain size is 1mm and the domain contains
about 1011 atoms. In the ﬁrst instant, the magnetisation varies randomly
from domain to domain and there is no bulk magnetisation. This is shown
in Fig. 5. 13(a). When we apply an external magnetic ﬁeld BO, the domains
orient themselves in the direction of B0 and simultaneously the domain
oriented in the direction of B0 grow in size. This existence of domains and
their motion in B0 are not speculations. One may observe this under a
microscope after sprinkling a liquid suspension of powdered

2019-20

B

'u
‘0

$319 'uiewop 'smnamw spouse“

uuq'5pumppauBPW/sois/tqd/alonmdﬁew

/989| log/(1w nuILuoD/saomosoau o! iconpg/BJO'pa-apu 'MMM/ﬂdllt]

 

FIGURE 5. 13

(a) Randomly
oriented domains.
(b) Aligned domains.

193