124

PHYSICS

 

external force Fdoes work + kxf / 2. If the block

is moved from an initial displacement xi to a
final displacement xf , the work done by the
spring force W5 is

k X? k X? (6.17)

2 2

 

 

WS=—){jkxdx 2

Thus the work done by the spring force depends
only on the end points. Specifically, if the block
is pulled from xi and allowed to return to xi ;

 

 

= (6.18)
The work done by the spring force in a cyclic
process is zero. We have explicitly demonstrated
that the spring force (i) is position dependent
only as first stated by Hooke, (FS = — kx); (ii)
does work which only depends on the initial and
final positions, e.g. Eq. (6.17). Thus, the spring
force is a conservative force.

We deﬁne the potential energy V(x) of the spring
to be zero when block and spring system is in the
equilibrium position. For an extension (or
compression) x the above analysis suggests that

2

V(x) = I“? (6.19)
You may easily verify that — dV/dx = — kx, the
spring force. If the block of mass m in Fig. 6.7 is
extended to xm and released from rest, then its
total mechanical energy at any arbitrary point x,
where xlies between —xm and + xm will be given by

1k xr2n=lk x2+lm v2

2 2 2
where we have invoked the conservation of
mechanical energy. This suggests that the speed
and the kinetic energy will be maximum at the
equilibrium position, x = 0, i.e.,

1 1
Em v3. = 5k x31
where um is the maximum speed.
k
or Um: — Xm
m

Note that k/ m has the dimensions of [T2] and
our equation is dimensionally correct. The
kinetic energy gets converted to potential energy

2019-20

and vice versa, however, the total mechanical
energy remains constant. This is graphically
depicted in Fig. 6.8.

 

"(m

Fig. 6.8 Parabolic plots of the potential energy Vand
kinetic energy K of a block attached to a
spring obeying Hooke’s law. The two plots
are complementary, one decreasing as the
other increases. The total mechanical
energy E = K + V remains constant.

p Erample 6.8 To simulate car accidents. auto
manufacturers study the collisions ofmoving
cars with mounted springs of different spring
constants. Consider a typical simulation with
a car of mass 1000 kg moving with a speed

18.0 km/ h on a smooth road and colliding
with a horizontally mounted spring of spring
constant 6.25 X 103 N mt‘. What is the
maximum compression of the spring ?

 

Answer At maximum compression the kinetic
energy of the car is converted entirely into the
potential energy of the spring.

The kinetic energy of the moving car is

K = 1.25 X 104J

where we have converted 18 Ian h’1 to 5 m s“1 [It is
useful to remember that 36 km h"1 = 10 m s‘1].
At maximum compression xm, the potential
energy V of the spring is equal to the kinetic
energy K of the moving car from the principle of
conservation of mechanical energy.