132

PHYSICS

={ v1f2 + U”2 + 2v1fv2f cos (191 + 37°) } (6.32)

Since the collision is elastic and m1 = m2 it follows
from conservation of kinetic energy that

v11.2 = 1)le + 1)sz (6-33)

Comparing Eqs. (6.32) and (6.33), we get
cos ((91 + 37°) = O

or 01 + 37° = 90°

Thus, 91 =53°

This proves the following result : when two equal
masses undergo a glancing elastic collision with
one of them at rest, after the collision, they will
move at right angles to each other. 4

The matter simplifies greatly if we consider
spherical masses with smooth surfaces, and
assume that collision takes place only when the
bodies touch each other. This is what happens
in the games of marbles, carrom and billiards.

In our everyday world, collisions take place only
when two bodies touch each other. But consider
a comet coming from far distances to the sun, or
alpha particle coming towards a nucleus and
going away in some direction. Here we have to
deal with forces involving action at a distance.
Such an event is called scattering. The velocities
and directions in which the two particles go away
depend on their initial velocities as well as the
type of interaction between them, their masses,
shapes and sizes.

SUM'MARY

i. The work-energy theorem states that the change in kinetic energy of a body is the work

done by the net force on the body.
K1" K. = W

net

2. A force is conservative if (i) work done by it on an object is path independent and
depends only on the end points {xi. )3}. or (ii) the work done by the force is zero for an
arbitrary closed path taken by the object such that it returns to its initial position.

3. For a conservative force in one dimension, we may deﬁne a potential energy function V[x]

 

such that
dV
F(x) 2 — (x)
dx
X,"
or W-VJ.=JF(x)dx

Xi

4. The principle of conservation of mechanical energy states that the total mechanical
energy of a body remains constant if the only forces that act on the body are conservative.
5. The gravitational potential energy of a particle of mass m at a height x about the earth’s

surface is

le} =mgx

where the variation of g with height is ignored.
6. The elastic potential energy of a spring of force constant k and extension xis

1 .
V(X)=§kx2

7. The scalar or dot product of two vectors A and B is written as AB and is a scalar
quantity given by : AB = AB cos 0. where 6 is the angle between A and B. It can be
positive. negative or zero depending upon the value of 6. The scalar product of two
vectors can be interpreted as the product of magnitude of one vector and component
of the other vector along the ﬁrst vector. For unit vectors :

i-izj-jzli-lizl and i

.jzj.ﬁ:ﬁ.i=o

Scalar products obey the commutative and the distributive laws.

2019-20