WAV ES

371

kx + constant. Thus, the shape of the wave (at
any fixed instant) as a function of x is a sine
wave. Similarly, take a fixed location, say x = x0.
Then, the argument of the sine function in
Equation (1 5.2) is constant -03t. The
displacement y, at a fixed location, thus, varies
sinusoidally with time. That is, the constituents
of the medium at different positions execute
simple harmonic motion. Finally, as tincreases,
xmust increase in the positive direction to keep
kx— cot + q) constant. Thus, Eq. (15.2) represents
a sinusiodal (harmonic) wave travelling along
the positive direction of the x—axis. On the other
hand, a function

y(x,t)=asin(kx+u)t+¢) (15.4)
represents a wave travelling in the negative
direction of x-axis. Fig. (15.5) gives the names of
the various physical quantities appearing in Eq.
(15.2) that we now interpret.

displacement as a function of
position x and time t
amplitude of a wave

angular frequency of the wave
angular wave number
initial phase angle (a+x = O, t= O)

 

Fig. 15.5 The meaning of standard symbols in
Eq. (15.2)

Fig. 15.6 shows the plots of Eq. (15.2) for
different values of time differing by equal
intervals of time. In a wave, the crest is the
point of maximum positive displacement, the
trough is the point of maximum negative
displacement. To see how a wave travels, we
can fix attention on a crest and see how it
progresses with time. In the figure, this is
shown by a cross (X) on the crest. In the same
manner, we can see the motion of a particular
constituent of the medium at a fixed location,
say at the origin of the x—axis. This is shown
by a solid dot (0). The plots of Fig. 15.6 show
that with time, the solid dot (0) at the origin
moves periodically, i.e., the particle at the
origin oscillates about its mean position as
the wave progresses. This is true for any other
location also. We also see that during the time
the solid dot (0) has completed one full
oscillation, the crest has moved further by a
certain distance.

 

(6)

Fig. 15.6 A harmonic wave progressing along the
positive direction of x—axis at different times.

Using the plots of Fig. 15.6, we now define
the various quantities of Eq. (15.2).

15.3.1 Amplitude and Phase

In Eq. (15.2), since the sine function varies
between 1 and —1, the displacement y (x, t) varies
between a and —a. We can take a to be a positive
constant, without any loss of generality. Then,
a represents the maximum displacement of the
constituents of the medium from their
equilibrium position. Note that the displacement
y may be positive or negative, but a is positive.
It is called the amplitude of the wave.

The quantity (kx — wt + (p) appearing as the
argument of the sine function in Eq. (15.2) is
called the phase of the wave. Given the
amplitude a, the phase determines the
displacement of the wave at any position and
at any instant. Clearly q) is the phase at x = O
and t = 0. Hence, ¢ is called the initial phase
angle. By suitable choice of origin on the x—axis
and the intial time, it is possible to have (1) = 0.
Thus there is no loss of generality in dropping
q), i.e., in taking Eq. (15.2) with q) = 0.

2019-20