l Physics

drift velocity vd (see Chapter 3). In the presence of an external magnetic
field B, the force on these carriers is:

F = (nlA)q vd x B
where q is the value of the charge on a carrier. Now nq v01 is the current

density j and | (nq vd) IA is the current I (see Chapter 3 for the discussion
of current and current density). Thus,
F = [(nqu)lA] x B = [jAl] x B
= I l x B (4.4)
where lis a vector of magnitude L the length of the rod, and with a direction
identical to the current I . Note that the current I is not a vector. In the last
step leading to Eq. (4.4), we have transferred the vector sign from j to 1.
Equation (4.4) holds for a straight rod. In this equation, B is the external

magnetic field. It is not the field produced by the current-carrying rod. If
the wire has an arbitrary shape we can calculate the Lorentz force on it

by considering it as a collection of linear strips dlj and summing
F = 21d:j x B
i

This summation can be converted to an integral in most cases.

ON PERMITTIVITY AND PERMEABILITY

In the universal law of gravitation, we say that any two point masses exert a force on
each other which is proportional to the product of the masses m1, m2 and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance r between them. We write it as F= Gm1m2/ r2
where G is the universal constant of gravitation. Similarly, in Coulomb’s law of electrostatics
we write the force between two point charges q1, q2, separated by a distance r as
F = kq1q2/ r2 where k is a constant of proportionality. In SI units, k is taken as
1 /4TC8 where s is the permittivity of the medium. Also in magnetism, we get another
constant, which in SI units, is taken as [.1/47t where ,u is the permeability of the medium.

Although G, 8 and ,u arise as proportionality constants, there is a difference between
gravitational force and electromagnetic force. While the gravitational force does not depend
on the intervening medium, the electromagnetic force depends on the medium between
the two charges or magnets. Hence, while G is a universal constant, 8 and ,u depend on
the medium. They have different values for different media. The product 8/.1 turns out to
be related to the speed 0 of electromagnetic radiation in the medium through 8/.1 = 1 / 02.

Electric permittivity 8 is a physical quantity that describes how an electric field affects
and is affected by a medium. It is determined by the ability of a material to polarise in
response to an applied field, and thereby to cancel, partially, the ﬁeld inside the material.
Similarly, magnetic permeability ,u is the ability of a substance to acquire magnetisation in
magnetic fields. It is a measure of the extent to which magnetic field can penetrate matter.

Example 4.1 A straight wire of mass 200 g and length 1.5 m carries
a current of 2 A. It is suspended in mid-air by a uniform horizontal
magnetic field B (Fig. 4.3). What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field?

EXAMPLE 4. 1

136

2019-20