15.1
15.2

15.3

15.4

15.5

15.6
15.7
15.8

Introduction

Transverse and
longitudinal waves

Displacement relation in a
progressive wave

The speed of a travelling
wave

The principle of
superposition of waves

Reﬂection of waves
Beats

Doppler effect

Summary

Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises

 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

11087CHIS

1 5. 1 INTRODUCTION

In the previous Chapter, we studied the motion of objects
oscillating in isolation. What happens in a system, which is
a collection of such objects? A material medium provides
such an example. Here, elastic forces bind the constituents

to each other and, therefore, the motion of one affects that of

the other. If you drop a little pebble in a pond of still water,
the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not
remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along
a circle. If you continue dropping pebbles in the pond, you
see circles rapidly moving outward from the point where the
water surface is disturbed. It gives a feeling as if the water is
moving outward from the point of disturbance. If you put
some cork pieces on the disturbed surface, it is seen that
the cork pieces move up and down but do not move away
from the centre of disturbance. This shows that the water
mass does not ﬂow outward with the circles, but rather a
moving disturbance is created. Similarly, when we speak,
the sound moves outward from us, without any ﬂow of air
from one part of the medium to another. The disturbances
produced in air are much less obvious and only our ears or
a microphone can detect them. These patterns, which move
without the actual physical transfer or ﬂow of matter as a
whole, are called waves. In this Chapter, we will study such
waves.

Waves transport energy and the pattern of disturbance has
information that propagate from one point to another. All our
communications essentially depend on transmission of sig-
nals through waves. Speech means production of sound
waves in air and hearing amounts to their detection. Often,
communication involves different kinds of waves. For exam-
ple, sound waves may be ﬁrst converted into an electric cur-
rent signal which in turn may generate an electromagnetic
wave that may be transmitted by an optical cable or via a

2019-20