398

 

 

l Physics

 

1 1.8 WAVE NATURE OF MATTER

The dual (wave-particle) nature of light (electromagnetic radiation, in
general) comes out clearly from what we have learnt in this and the
preceding chapters. The wave nature of light shows up in the phenomena
of interference, diffraction and polarisation. On the other hand, in
photoelectric effect and Compton effect which involve energy and
momentum transfer, radiation behaves as if it is made up of a bunch of
particles — the photons. Whether a particle or wave description is best
suited for understanding an experiment depends on the nature of the
experiment. For example, in the familiar phenomenon of seeing an object
by our eye, both descriptions are important. The gathering and focussing
mechanism of light by the eye-lens is well described in the wave picture.
But its absorption by the rods and cones (of the retina) requires the photon
picture of light.

A natural question arises: If radiation has a dual (wave-particle) nature,
might not the particles of nature (the electrons, protons, etc.) also exhibit
wave-like character? In 1924, the French physicist Louis Victor de Broglie
(pronounced as de Broy) (1892-1987) put forward the bold hypothesis
that moving particles of matter should display wave-like properties under
suitable conditions. He reasoned that nature was symmetrical and that
the two basic physical entities — matter and energy, must have symmetrical
character. If radiation shows dual aspects, so should matter. De Broglie
proposed that the wave length it associated with a particle of momentum
p is given as

h h

:_: __ (11.5)
p mv

where m is the mass of the particle and 0 its speed. Equation (1 1.5) is
known as the de Broglie relation and the wavelength it of the matter
wave is called de Broglie wavelength. The dual aspect of matter is evident
in the de Broglie relation. On the left hand side of Eq. (1 1.5), 7» is the
attribute of a wave while on the right hand side the momentum p is a
typical attribute of a particle. Planck’s constant h relates the two
attributes.

Equation (1 1 . 5) for a material particle is basically a hypothesis whose
validity can be tested only by experiment. However, it is interesting to see
that it is satisfied also by a photon. For a photon, as we have seen,

p=hv /c (11.6)
Therefore,

h c

;=;=/l (11.7)

That is, the de Broglie wavelength of a photon given by Eq. (1 1.5) equals
the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation of which the photon is a
quantum of energy and momentum.

Clearly, from Eq. (1 1.5 ), )L is smaller for a heavier particle (large m) or
more energetic particle (large v). For example, the de Broglie wavelength
of a ball of mass 0.12 kg moving with a speed of 20 m s‘1 is easily
calculated:

2019-20