158

PHYSICS

 

Answer Let the particle with velocity v be at
point P at some instant t. We want to calculate
the angular momentum of the particle about an
arbitrary point 0.

 

0

Fig 7.19

The angular momentum is l = rX mv. Its
magnitude is mvr sine, where 0 is the angle
between 1' and v as shown in Fig. 7. 19. Although
the particle changes position with time, the line
of direction of v remains the same and hence
OM = r sin 0. is a constant.

Further, the direction of l is perpendicular
to the plane of r and v. It is into the page of the
figure.This direction does not change with time.

Thus, 1 remains the same in magnitude and
direction and is therefore conserved. Is there
any external torque on the particle? 4

7.8 EQUILIBRIUM OF A RIGID BODY

We are now going to concentrate on the motion
of rigid bodies rather than on the motion of
general systems of particles.

We shall recapitulate what effect the
external forces have on a rigid body. (Henceforth
we shall omit the adjective ‘external’ because
unless stated otherwise, we shall deal with only
external forces and torques.) The forces change
the translational state of the motion of the rigid
body, i.e. they change its total linear momentum
in accordance with Eq. (7.17). But this is not
the only effect the forces have. The total torque
on the body may not vanish. Such a torque
changes the rotational state of motion of the
rigid body, i.e. it changes the total angular
momentum of the body in accordance with Eq.
(7 .28 b).

A rigid body is said to be in mechanical
equilibrium, if both its linear momentum and
angular momentum are not changing with time,
or equivalently, the body has neither linear

2019-20

acceleration nor angular acceleration. This

means

(1) the total force, i.e. the vector sum of the
forces, on the rigid body is zero;

F1+F2+...+FH=ZFi=0 (7.30a)
i=1

If the total force on the body is zero, then
the total linear momentum of the body does
not change with time. Eq. (7 .30a) gives the
condition for the translational equilibrium
of the body.

(2) The total torque, i.e. the vector sum of the
torques on the rigid body is zero,

121+152+...+‘Cn=z12i=0 (7.30b)

i=1

If the total torque on the rigid body is zero,
the total angular momentum of the body does
not change with time. Eq. (7.30 b) gives the
condition for the rotational equilibrium of the
body.

One may raise a question, whether the
rotational equilibrium condition [Eq. 7 .30(b)]
remains valid, if the origin with respect to which
the torques are taken is shifted. One can show
that if the translational equilibrium condition
[Eq. 7 .30(a)] holds for a rigid body, then such a
shift of origin does not matter, i.e. the rotational
equilibrium condition is independent of the
location of the origin about which the torques
are taken. Example 7.7 gives a proof of this
result in a special case of a couple, i.e. two forces
acting on a rigid body in translational
equilibrium. The generalisation of this result to
n forces is left as an exercise.

Eq. (7 .30a) and Eq. (7 .30b), both, are vector
equations. They are equivalent to three scalar
equations each. Eq. (7 .30a) corresponds to

;Fm=0, gmy=0 and gFiz=o (7.31a)

where Fix, Fig and Fiz are respectively the x, y
and 2 components of the forces Fi. Similarly,
Eq. (7.30b) is equivalent to three scalar
equations

Tiy : O and £712 2 O (7.31b)

i=1

1. =0

IX 5

n n
i=1 [:1

where 170‘, fig and 11.2 are respectively the x, y and
2 components of the torque 1.- .