14.18

14.19

14.20

14.21

14.22

14.23

14.24

14.25

PHYSICS

 

A cylindrical piece of cork of density of base area A and height h ﬂoats in a liquid of
density pl. The cork is depressed slightly and then released. Show that the cork
oscillates up and down simple harmonically with a period

T=27c 2

P19
where p is the density of cork. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid).

One end of a U—tube containing mercury is connected to a suction pump and the
other end to atmosphere. A small pressure difference is maintained between the
two columns. Show that, when the suction pump is removed, the column of mercury
in the U—tube executes simple harmonic motion.

Additional Exercises

An air chamber of volume Vhas a neck area of cross section a into which a ball of
mass m just fits and can move up and down without any friction (Fig. 14.27). Show
that when the ball is pressed down a little and released , it executes SHM. Obtain
an expression for the time period of oscillations assuming pressure—volume variations
of air to be isothermal [see Fig. 14.27].

m

Fig.14.27

You are riding in an automobile of mass 3000 kg. Assuming that you are examining
the oscillation characteristics of its suspension system. The suspension sags
15 cm when the entire automobile is placed on it. Also, the amplitude of oscillation
decreases by 50% during one complete oscillation. Estimate the values of (a) the
spring constant kand (b) the damping constant b for the spring and shock absorber
system of one wheel, assuming that each wheel supports 750 kg.

Show that for a particle in linear SHM the average kinetic energy over a period of
oscillation equals the average potential energy over the same period.

A circular disc of mass 10 kg is suspended by a wire attached to its centre. The wire

is twisted by rotating the disc and released. The period of torsional oscillations is

found to be 1.5 s. The radius of the disc is 15 cm. Determine the torsional spring

constant of the wire. [Torsional spring constant a is defined by the relation
= —a 0 , where J is the restoring couple and 9 the angle of twist).

A body describes simple harmonic motion with an amplitude of 5 cm and a period of
0.2 s. Find the acceleration and velocity of the body when the displacement is
(a) 5 cm (b) 3 cm [0) 0 cm.

A mass attached to a spring is free to oscillate, with angular velocity (0, in a horizontal
plane without friction or damping. It is pulled to a distance x0 and pushed towards
the centre with a velocity Do at time t = 0. Determine the amplitude of the resulting
oscillations in terms of the parameters w, x0 and v0. [Hint : Start with the equation
x = (1 cos (cot+6] and note that the initial velocity is negative.]

2019-20