l Physics

 

A SPECIAL CASE OF TOTAL TRANSMISSION

When light is incident on an interface of two media, it is observed that some part of it
gets reﬂected and some part gets transmitted. Consider a related question: Is it possible
that under some conditions a monochromatic beam of light incident on a surface
(which is normally reﬂective) gets completely transmitted with no reﬂection? To your
surprise, the answer is yes.

 

Screen

Let us try a simple experiment and check what happens. Arrange a laser, a good
polariser, a prism and screen as shown in the ﬁgure here.

Let the light emitted by the laser source pass through the polariser and be incident
on the surface of the prism at the Brewster’s angle of incidence iB. Now rotate the
polariser carefully and you will observe that for a speciﬁc alignment of the polariser, the
light incident on the prism is completely transmitted and no light is reﬂected from the
surface of the prism. The reﬂected spot will completely vanish. ‘

10.7.2 Polarisation by reﬂection

Figure 10.23(b) shows light reﬂected from a transparent medium, say,
water. As before, the dots and arrows indicate that both polarisations are
present in the incident and refracted waves. We have drawn a situation
in which the reﬂected wave travels at right angles to the refracted wave.
The oscillating electrons in the water produce the reﬂected wave. These
move in the two directions transverse to the radiation from wave in the
medium, i.e., the refracted wave. The arrows are parallel to the direction
of the reﬂected wave. Motion in this direction does not contribute to the
reﬂected wave. As the ﬁgure shows, the reﬂected light is therefore linearly
polarised perpendicular to the plane of the figure (represented by dots).
This can be checked by looking at the reﬂected light through an analyser.
The transmitted intensity will be zero when the axis of the analyser is in
the plane of the figure, i.e., the plane of incidence.

When unpolarised light is incident on the boundary between two
transparent media, the reﬂected light is polarised with its electric vector
perpendicular to the plane of incidence when the refracted and reﬂected
rays make a right angle with each other. Thus we have seen that when
reﬂected wave is perpendicular to the refracted wave, the reﬂected wave
is a totally polarised wave. The angle of incidence in this case is called
Brewster’s angle and is denoted by iB. We can see that iB is related to the
refractive index of the denser medium. Since we have iB+r = at / 2, we get
from Snell’s law

_ sin iB sin iB

 

380 # sinr sin(7r/2—iB)

2019-20