440

 

 

l Physics

 

atomic electrons is thus (—Ze), and since the atom is neutral, the charge
of the nucleus is (+Ze). The number of protons in the nucleus of the atom
is, therefore, exactly Z, the atomic number.

Discovery of Neutron

Since the nuclei of deuterium and tritium are isotopes of hydrogen, they
must contain only one proton each. But the masses of the nuclei of
hydrogen, deuterium and tritium are in the ratio of 1:2:3. Therefore, the
nuclei of deuterium and tritium must contain, in addition to a proton,
some neutral matter. The amount of neutral matter present in the nuclei
of these isotopes, expressed in units of mass of a proton, is approximately
equal to one and two, respectively. This fact indicates that the nuclei of
atoms contain, in addition to protons, neutral matter in multiples of a
basic unit. This hypothesis was verified in 1932 by James Chadwick
who observed emission of neutral radiation when beryllium nuclei were
bombarded with alpha-particles (oz-particles are helium nuclei, to be
discussed in a later section). It was found that this neutral radiation
could knock out protons from light nuclei such as those of helium, carbon
and nitrogen. The only neutral radiation known at that time was photons
(electromagnetic radiation). Application of the principles of conservation
of energy and momentum showed that if the neutral radiation consisted
of photons, the energy of photons would have to be much higher than is
available from the bombardment of beryllium nuclei with a-particles.
The clue to this puzzle, which Chadwick satisfactorily solved, was to
assume that the neutral radiation consists of a new type of neutral
particles called neutrons. From conservation of energy and momentum,
he was able to determine the mass of new particle ‘as very nearly the
same as mass of proton’.

The mass of a neutron is now known to a high degree of accuracy. It is

mn = 1.00866 u = 1.6749X10‘27 kg (13.3)

Chadwick was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his
discovery of the neutron.

A free neutron, unlike a free proton, is unstable. It decays into a
proton, an electron and a antineutrino (another elementary particle), and
has a mean life of about 1000s. It is, however, stable inside the nucleus.

The composition of a nucleus can now be described using the following
terms and symbols:

Z - atomic number = number of protons [13.4(a)]
N - neutron number = number of neutrons [13.4(b)]

A- mass number=Z+N

= total number of protons and neutrons [13.4(c)]

One also uses the term nucleon for a proton or a neutron. Thus the
number of nucleons in an atom is its mass number A.

Nuclear species or nuclides are shown by the notation ‘Z‘X where X is
the chemical symbol of the species. For example, the nucleus of gold is
denoted by 1% Au. It contains 197 nucleons, of which 79 are protons
and the restl 18 are neutrons.

2019-20