CHAPTER SEVEN

 

| | 056cm?

SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION

Introduction
Centre of mass
Motion of centre of mass

Linear momentum of a
system of particles

Vector product of two
vectors

Angular velocity and its
relation with linear velocity

Torque and angular

momentum
Equilibrium of a rigid body
Moment of inertia

Theorems of perpendicular
and parallel axes

Kinematics of rotational
motion about a ﬁxed axis

Dynamics of rotational
motion about a fixed axis

Angular momentum in case
of rotation about a fixed axis

Rolling motion

Summary
Points to Ponder

Exercises
Additional exercises

 

’

7. 1 INTRODUCTION

In the earlier chapters we primarily considered the motion
of a single particle. (A particle is ideally represented as a
point mass having no size.) We applied the results of our
study even to the motion of bodies of finite size, assuming
that motion of such bodies can be described in terms of the
motion of a particle.

Any real body which we encounter in daily life has a
finite size. In dealing with the motion of extended bodies
(bodies of finite size) often the idealised model of a particle is
inadequate. In this chapter we shall try to go beyond this
inadequacy. We shall attempt to build an understanding of
the motion of extended bodies. An extended body, in the
first place, is a system of particles. We shall begin with the
consideration of motion of the system as a whole. The centre
of mass of a system of particles will be a key concept here.
We shall discuss the motion of the centre of mass of a system
of particles and usefulness of this concept in understanding
the motion of extended bodies.

A large class of problems with extended bodies can be
solved by considering them to be rigid bodies. Ideally a
rigid body is a body with a perfectly definite and
unchanging shape. The distances between all pairs of
particles of such a body do not change. It is evident from
this definition of a rigid body that no real body is truly rigid,
since real bodies deform under the inﬂuence of forces. But in
many situations the deformations are negligible. In a number
of situations involving bodies such as wheels, tops, steel
beams, molecules and planets on the other hand, we can ignore
that they warp (twist out of shape), bend or vibrate and treat
them as rigid.

7.1.1 What kind of motion can a rigid body have?

Let us try to explore this question by taking some examples
of the motion of rigid bodies. Let us begin with a rectangular

2019-20