Roy Optics and
Optical Instruments

 

m = me x m0 where me = 1 + [D/fe], is the magnification due to the
eyepiece and mo is the magnification produced by the objective.

Approximately,
L D

m = — >< —
f o f e

where f0 and fe are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
respectively, and L is the distance between their focal points.

Magnifying power m of a telescope is the ratio of the angle [3 subtended
at the eye by the image to the angle a subtended at the eye by the
object.

m = _ﬂ = L
a fe
where f0 and fe are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
respectively.

POINTS TO PONDER

The laws of reﬂection and refraction are true for all surfaces and
pairs of media at the point of the incidence.

The real image of an object placed between f and 2 f from a convex lens
can be seen on a screen placed at the image location. If the screen is
removed, is the image still there? This question puzzles many, because
it is difficult to reconcile ourselves with an image suspended in air
without a screen. But the image does exist. Rays from a given point
on the object are converging to an image point in space and diverging
away. The screen simply diffuses these rays, some of which reach our
eye and we see the image. This can be seen by the images formed in
air during a laser show.

Image formation needs regular reﬂection/ refraction. In principle, all
rays from a given point should reach the same image point. This is
why you do not see your image by an irregular reﬂecting object, say
the page of a book.

Thick lenses give coloured images due to dispersion. The variety in
colour of objects we see around us is due to the constituent colours
of the light incident on them. A monochromatic light may produce an
entirely different perception about the colours on an object as seen in
white light.

For a simple microscope, the angular size of the object equals the
angular size of the image. Yet it offers magnification because we can
keep the small object much closer to the eye than 25 cm and hence
have it subtend a large angle. The image is at 25 cm which we can see.
Without the microscope, you would need to keep the small object at
25 cm which would subtend a very small angle.

2019-20

343