OSCILLATIONS

will make an angle of wt + q) with the +ve
x—aXis. Next, consider the projection of the
position vector OP on the x—axis. This will be
OP’. The position of P’ on the x—aXis, as the
particle P moves on the circle, is given by
x(t) = A cos (wt+ ¢)

which is the defining equation of SHM. This
shows that if P moves uniformly on a circle,
its projection P’ on a diameter of the circle
executes SHM. The particle P and the circle
on which it moves are sometimes referred to
as the reference particle and the reference circle,
respectively.

We can take projection of the motion of P on
any diameter, say the y-axis. In that case. the
displacement y(t) of P’ on the y-axis is given by

y=Asin (cot+ (1))

which is also an SHM of the same amplitude
as that of the projection on x-axis, but differing
by a phase of 7r/2.

In spite of this connection between circular
motion and SHM, the force acting on a particle
in linear simple harmonic motion is very
different from the centripetal force needed to
keep a particle in uniform circular motion.

347

Example 14.4 The figure given below
depicts two circular motions. The radius
of the circle. the period of revolution. the
initial position and the sense of revolution
are indicated in the figures. Obtain the
simple harmonic motions of the
x-projection of the radius vector of the
rotating particle P in each case.

    

Answer

(a) At t= 0, OP makes an angle of 450 = 7c/4 rad
with the (positive direction of) x—axis. After

time t, it covers an angle 272% in the

anticlockwise sense, and makes an angle

of ﬁt + E with the x-aXis.
T 4-

The projection of OP on the x-axis at time t
is given by,

x(t) =Acos (th+£]

T 4
For T= 4 s,
x(t) =Acos (at + E]
4 4
which is a SHM of amplitude A, period 4 s,

7!

and an initial phase* = _
4

* The natural unit of angle is radian, defined through the ratio of arc to radius. Angle is a dimensionless
quantity. Therefore it is not always necessary to mention the unit ‘radian’ when we use 7:, its multiples
or submultiples. The conversion between radian and degree is not similar to that between metre and
centimetre or mile. If the argument of a trigonometric function is stated without units, it is understood
that the unit is radian. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be
shown explicitly. For example, sin(1 50) means sine of 1 5 degree, but sin(1 5) means sine of 1 5 radians.
Hereafter, we will often drop ‘rad’ as the unit, and it should be understood that whenever angle is
mentioned as a numerical value, without units, it is to be taken as radians.

2019-20