194

 

 

i Physics

Hysterisis in magnetic materials:
, f" ’ http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/solids/hysthtml

   

ferromagnetic substance of samples. This motion of suspension can be
observed. Figure 5.12(b) shows the situation when the domains have
aligned and amalgamated to form a single ‘giant’ domain.

Thus, in a ferromagnetic material the field lines are highly
concentrated. In non-uniform magnetic field, the sample tends to move
towards the region of high field. We may wonder as to what happens
when the external field is removed. In some ferromagnetic materials the
magnetisation persists. Such materials are called hard magnetic materials
or hard ferromagnets. Alnico, an alloy of iron, aluminium, nickel, cobalt
and copper, is one such material. The naturally occurring lodestone is
another. Such materials form permanent magnets to be used among other
things as a compass needle. On the other hand, there is a class of
ferromagnetic materials in which the magnetisation disappears on removal
of the external ﬁeld. Soft iron is one such material. Appropriately enough,
such materials are called soﬁ ferromagnetic materials. There are a number
of elements, which are ferromagnetic: iron, cobalt, nickel, gadolinium,
etc. The relative magnetic permeability is > 1000!

The ferromagnetic property depends on temperature. At high enough
temperature, a ferromagnet becomes a paramagnet. The domain structure
disintegrates with temperature. This disappearance of magnetisation with
temperature is gradual. It is a phase transition reminding us of the melting
of a solid crystal. The temperature of transition from ferromagnetic to
paramagnetism is called the Curie temperature TC. Table 5.4 lists
the Curie temperature of certain ferromagnets. The susceptibility
above the Curie temperature, i.e., in the paramagnetic phase is
described by,

C

 

(T>R) wan

TABLE 5.4 CURIE TEMPERATURE TC OF SOME
FERROMAGNETIC MATERIALS

Cobalt 1394
Iron 1043
Fe2O3 893
Nickel 63 1
Gadolinium 3 17

Example 5.11 A domain in ferromagnetic iron is in the form of a cube
of side length 1pm. Estimate the number of iron atoms in the domain
and the maximum possible dipole moment and magnetisation of the
domain. The molecular mass of iron is 55 g/ mole and its density
is 7.9 g/cm3. Assume that each iron atom has a dipole moment
of 9.27x10“24 A m2.

2019-20