LAWS OF MOTION

91

 

In practice, the ball does come to a stop after
moving a finite distance on the horizontal plane,
because of the opposing force of friction which
can never be totally eliminated. However, if there
were no friction, the ball would continue to move
with a constant velocity on the horizontal plane.

Galileo thus, arrived at a new insight on
motion that had eluded Aristotle and those who
followed him. The state of rest and the state of
uniform linear motion (motion with constant
velocity) are equivalent. In both cases, there is

accomplished almost single-handedly by Isaac
Newton, one of the greatest scientists of all times.
Newton built on Galileo’s ideas and laid the
foundation of mechanics in terms of three laws
of motion that go by his name. Galileo’s law of
inertia was his starting point which he
formulated as the first law of motion:
Every body continues to be in its state
of rest or of uniform motion in a straight
line unless compelled by some external
force to act otherwise.

 

Ideas on Motion in Ancient Indian Science

Ancient Indian thinkers had arrived at an elaborate system of ideas on motion. Force. the cause of
motion. was thought to be of diﬁerent kinds : force due to continuous pressure [nodan]. as the force
of wind on a sailing vessel; impact [abhighat). as when a potter's rod strikes the wheel: persistent
tendency [sanskara] to move in a straight line(vega) or restoration of shape in an elastic body:
transmitted force by a string. rod. etc. The notion of (vega) in the Vaisesika theory of motion perhaps
comes closest to the concept of inertia. Vega. the tendency to move in a straight line. was thought to
be opposed by contact with objects including atmosphere. a parallel to the ideas of friction and air
resistance. It was correctly summarised that the different kinds of motion (translational. rotational
and vibrational) of an extended body arise from only the translational motion of its constituent
particles. A falling leaf in the wind may have downward motion as a whole [patan) and also rotational
and vibrational motion [bhraman. spandan). but each particle of the leaf at an instant only has a
deﬁnite (small) displacement. There was considerable focus in Indian thought on measurement of
motion and units of length and time. It was known that the position of a particle in space can be
indicated by distance measured along three axes. Bhaskara [1150 AD.) had introduced the concept
of ‘instantaneous motion' [tatkaliki gati']. which anticipated the modem notion of instantaneous
velocity using Differential Calculus. The difference between a wave and a current (of water) was clearly
understood: a current is a motion of particles of water under gravity and ﬂuidity while a wave results

 

no net force acting on the body. It is incorrect to
assume that a net force is needed to keep a body
in uniform motion. To maintain a body in
uniform motion, we need to apply an external
force to ecounter the frictional force, so that
the two forces sum up to zero net external
force.

To summarise, if the net external force is zero,
a body at rest continues to remain at rest and a
body in motion continues to move with a uniform
velocity. This property of the body is called
inertia. Inertia means ‘resistance to change’.
A body does not change its state of rest or
uniform motion, unless an external force
compels it to change that state.

5.4 NEWTON'S FIRST LAW OF MOTION

Galileo’s simple, but revolutionary ideas
dethroned Aristotelian mechanics. A new
mechanics had to be developed. This task was

from the transmission of vibrations of water particles.

 

The state of rest or uniform linear motion both
imply zero acceleration. The first law of motion can,
therefore, be simply expressed as:

If the net external force on a body is zero, its
acceleration is zero. Acceleration can be non
zero only if there is a net external force on
the body.

Two kinds of situations are encountered in the
application of this law in practice. In some
examples, we know that the net external force
on the object is zero. In that case we can
conclude that the acceleration of the object is
zero. For example, a spaceship out in
interstellar space, far from all other objects and
with all its rockets turned off, has no net
external force acting on it. Its acceleration,
according to the first law, must be zero. If it is
in motion, it must continue to move with a
uniform velocity.

2019-20