Alternating Current

The average power loss over a complete cycle is given by
P = V I cos¢
The term cosd) is called the powerfactor.

In a purely inductive or capacitive circuit, cosd) = O and no power is
dissipated even though a current is ﬂowing in the circuit. In such cases,
current is referred to as a wattless current.

The phase relationship between current and voltage in an ac circuit
can be shown conveniently by representing voltage and current by
rotating vectors called phasors. A phasor is a vector which rotates
about the origin with angular speed a). The magnitude of a phasor
represents the amplitude or peak value of the quantity (voltage or
current) represented by the phasor.

The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the use of a phasor
diagram.

An interesting characteristic of a series RLC circuit is the
phenomenon of resonance. The circuit exhibits resonance, i.e.,
the amplitude of the current is maximum at the resonant

frequency, 600 = L. The quality factor Q defined by

M

(00L _ 1
R wOCR

the higher value of Q indicating sharper peak in the current.

is an indicator of the sharpness of the resonance,

Q:

A circuit containing an inductor L and a capacitor C (initially
charged) with no ac source and no resistors exhibits free
oscillations. The charge q of the capacitor satisfies the equation
of simple harmonic motion:

and therefore, the frequency a) of free oscillation is (00 = \/L— .

energy in the system oscillates between the capacitor and the
inductor but their sum or the total energy is constant in time.

. A transformer consists of an iron core on which are bound a
primary coil of Np turns and a secondary coil of NS turns. If the
primary coil is connected to an ac source, the primary and
secondary voltages are related by

NS
VS=[N ]V,

p

and the currents are related by

If the secondary coil has a greater number of turns than the primary, the
voltage is stepped—up (VS > Vp). This type of arrangement is called a step—
up transformer. If the secondary coil has turns less than the primary, we
have a step—down transformer.