108 PHYSICS
—

In simple terms, the law can be stated thus :
Forces in nature always occur between pairs of bodies. Force on a body A by body
B is equal and opposite to the force on the body B by A.
Action and reaction forces are simultaneous forces. There is no cause-effect
relation between action and reaction. Any of the two mutual forces can be
called action and the other reaction. Action and reaction act on different
bodies and so they cannot be cancelled out. The internal action and reaction
forces between different parts of a body do, however, sum to zero.

7. Law of Conservation ofMomentum
The total momentum of an isolated system of particles is conserved. The law
follows from the second and third law of motion.

8. Friction
Frictional force opposes (impending or actual) relative motion between two
surfaces in contact. It is the component of the contact force along the common
tangent to the surface in contact. Static friction fS opposes impending relative
motion; kinetic friction fk opposes actual relative motion. They are independent
of the area of contact and satisfy the following approximate laws :

fs S (fslmaX = :usR

f k = ”kR
us (co—efficient of static friction) and uk [co-efficient of kinetic friction) are

constants characteristic of the pair of surfaces in contact. It is found
experimentally that ukis less than us.

Momentum kg m s or N s [MLT ] Vector

    

Force F N [MLT-Z] F = m a Second Law

Impulse kg m s"1 or N s [M 13“} Impulse = force X time
= change in momentum

Static friction N [MLT'Z] fs 5 ,us N

Kinetic friction N [MLT'Z] fk = #1: N

 

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Force is not always in the direction of motion. Depending on the situation. F
may be along v. opposite to v. nomlal to v or may make some other angle with
v. In every case. it is parallel to acceleration.

2. va = 0 at an instant, i.e. ifa body is momentarily at rest. it does not mean that
force or acceleration are necessarily zero at that instant. For example. when a
ball thrown upward reaches its maximum height. v = 0 but the force continues
to be its weight mg and the acceleration is not zero but g.

3. Force on a body at a given time is determined by the situation at the location of
the body at that time. Force is not 'carried' by the body from its earlier history of
motion. The moment after a stone is released out of an accelerated train. there is
no horizontal force (or acceleration) on the stone, if the effects of the surrounding
air are neglected. The stone then has only the vertical force of gravity.

4. In the second law of motion F = m a. F stands for the net force due to all
material agencies external to the body. a is the effect of the force. ma should
not be regarded as yet another force. besides F.

 

2019-20