I Physics

2.6 EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES

An equipotential surface is a surface with a constant value of potential
at all points on the surface. For a single charge q, the potential is given
by Eq. (2.8):

V—lq

 

47:80 r

This shows that Vis a constant if r is constant. Thus, equipotential
surfaces of a single point charge are concentric spherical surfaces centred
at the charge.

Now the electric ﬁeld lines for a single charge q are radial lines starting
from or ending at the charge, depending on whether q is positive or negative.
Clearly, the electric ﬁeld at every point is normal to the equipotential surface
passing through that point. This is true in general: for any charge
conﬁguration, equipotential surface through a point is normal to the
electric field at that point. The proof of this statement is simple.

If the ﬁeld were not normal to the equipotential surface, it would
have non-zero component along the surface. To move a unit test charge
against the direction of the component of the ﬁeld, work would have to

(a)

(b) be done. But this is in contradiction to the deﬁnition of an equipotential
FIGURE 2-9 For a surface: there is no potential difference between any two points on the
Single Charge (1 surface and no work is required to move a test charge on the surface.
(a) EQPiPOtential The electric ﬁeld must, therefore, be normal to the equipotential surface
suftaces are at every point. Equipotential surfaces offer an alternative visual picture
Sphencal surfaces in addition to the picture of electric field lines around a charge
centred at the configuration.

charge. and

(b) electric field
lines are radial. - -
starting from the _ —
charge if q > 0.

FIGURE 2.10 Equipotential surfaces for a uniform electric field.

 

 

 

 

VVVV

 

 

For a uniform electric ﬁeld E, say, along the x -a1ds, the equipotential
surfaces are planes normal to the x -axis, i.e., planes parallel to the y-z
plane (Fig. 2.10). Equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole and (b) two
identical positive charges are shown in Fig. 2.1 1.

 

FIGURE 2.11 Some equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole.
(b) two identical positive charges.

60

2019-20