a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent to it at each
point is in the direction of the net field at that point. An
arrow on the curve is obviously necessary to specify the
direction of electric ﬁeld from the two possible directions
indicated by a tangent to the curve. A ﬁeld line is a space
curve, i.e., a curve in three dimensions.

Figure 1.1 7 shows the ﬁeld lines around some simple
charge conﬁgurations. As mentioned earlier, the ﬁeld lines
are in 3-dimensional space, though the ﬁgure shows them
only in a plane. The ﬁeld lines of a single positive charge
are radially outward while those of a single negative
charge are radially inward. The ﬁeld lines around a system
of two positive charges (q, q) give a vivid pictorial
description of their mutual repulsion, while those around
the conﬁguration of two equal and opposite charges
(q, —q), a dipole, show clearly the mutual attraction
between the charges. The ﬁeld lines follow some important
general properties:

(i) Field lines start from positive charges and end at
negative charges. If there is a single charge, they may
start or end at inﬁnity.

(ii) In a charge-free region, electric ﬁeld lines can be taken
to be continuous curves without any breaks.

(iii) Two ﬁeld lines can never cross each other. (If they did,
the field at the point of intersection will not have a
unique direction, which is absurd.)

(iv) Electrostatic field lines do not form any closed loops.

This follows from the conservative nature of electric
ﬁeld (Chapter 2).

1 . 10 ELECTRIC FLUX

Consider ﬂow of a liquid with velocity v, through a small
ﬂat surface dS, in a direction normal to the surface. The
rate of ﬂow of liquid is given by the volume crossing the
area per unit time 0 dS and represents the ﬂux of liquid
ﬂowing across the plane. If the normal to the surface is
not parallel to the direction of ﬂow of liquid, i.e., to v, but
makes an angle 0 with it, the projected area in a plane
perpendicular to v is 0 ds cos 0. Therefore, the ﬂux going
out of the surface dS is v. :1 ds. For the case of the electric
ﬁeld, we define an analogous quantity and call it electric
ﬂux. We should, however, note that there is no ﬂow of a
physically observable quantity unlike the case of
liquid ﬂow.

In the picture of electric field lines described above,
we saw that the number of ﬁeld lines crossing a unit area,
placed normal to the ﬁeld at a point is a measure of the
strength of electric field at that point. This means that if

2019-20

Electric Charges
and Fields

v/
7m

\\ /
/ \\,.,

 

 

(b)
+ +
q q
+q -
(d)

FIGURE 1.17 Field lines due to
some simple charge configurations.

25