l Physics

 

APPENDIX

11.1 The history of wave-particle ﬂip-ﬂop

What is light? This question has haunted mankind for a long time. But systematic experiments were done by
scientists since the dawn of the scientific and industrial era, about four centuries ago. Around the same time,
theoretical models about what light is made of were developed. While building a model in any branch of
science, it is essential to see that it is able to explain all the experimental observations existing at that time.
It is therefore appropriate to summarize some observations about light that were known in the seventeenth
century.

The properties of light known at that time included (a) rectilinear propagation of light, (b) reﬂection from
plane and curved surfaces, [c] refraction at the boundary of two media, [d] dispersion into various colours, [e]
high speed. Appropriate laws were formulated for the first four phenomena. For example, Snell formulated his
laws of refraction in 1621. Several scientists right from the days of Galileo had tried to measure the speed of
light. But they had not been able to do so. They had only concluded that it was higher than the limit of their
measurement.

Two models of light were also proposed in the seventeenth century. Descartes, in early decades of seventeenth
century, proposed that light consists of particles, while Huygens, around 1650—60, proposed that light consists
of waves. Descartes’ proposal was merely a philosophical model, devoid of any experiments or scientific
arguments. Newton soon after, around 1660-70, extended Descartes’ particle model, known as corpuscular
theory, built it up as a scientific theory, and explained various known properties with it. These models, light
as waves and as particles, in a sense, are quite opposite of each other. But both models could explain all the
known properties of light. There was nothing to choose between them.

The history of the development of these models over the next few centuries is interesting. Bartholinus, in
1669, discovered double refraction of light in some crystals, and Huygens, in 1678, was quick to explain it on
the basis of his wave theory of light. In spite of this, for over one hundred years, Newton’s particle model was
firmly believed and preferred over the wave model. This was partly because of its simplicity and partly because
of Newton’s inﬂuence on contemporary physics.

Then in 180 1, Young performed his double-slit experiment and observed interference fringes. This
phenomenon could be explained only by wave theory. It was realized that diffraction was also another
phenomenon which could be explained only by wave theory. In fact, it was a natural consequence of Huygens
idea of secondary wavelets emanating from every point in the path of light. These experiments could not be
explained by assuming that light consists of particles. Another phenomenon of polarisation was discovered
around 1810, and this too could be naturally explained by the wave theory. Thus wave theory of Huygens
came to the forefront and Newton’s particle theory went into the background. This situation again continued
for almost a century.

Better experiments were performed in the nineteenth century to determine the speed of light. With more
accurate experiments, a value of 3X 108 m/ s for speed of light in vacuum was arrived at. Around 1860, Maxwell
proposed his equations of electromagnetism and it was realized that all electromagnetic phenomena known at
that time could be explained by Maxwell’s four equations. Soon Maxwell showed that electric and magnetic
fields could propagate through empty space [vacuum] in the form of electromagnetic waves. He calculated the
speed of these waves and arrived at a theoretical value of 2.998X 108 m/s. The close agreement of this value
with the experimental value suggested that light consists of electromagnetic waves. In 1887 Hertz demonstrated
the generation and detection of such waves. This established the wave theory of light on a firm footing. We
might say that while eighteenth century belonged to the particle model, the nineteenth century belonged to
the wave model of light.

Vast amounts of experiments were done during the period 1850— 1900 on heat and related phenomena, an
altogether different area of physics. Theories and models like kinetic theory and thermodynamics were developed
which quite successfully explained the various phenomena, except one.

412

2019-20