190

 

 

i Physics

BO=yOnI (512)

If the interior of the solenoid is ﬁlled with a material with non-zero
magnetisation, the ﬁeld inside the solenoid will be greater than BO. The
net B ﬁeld in the interior of the solenoid may be expressed as

B=BO+Bm (513

where Bm is the field contributed by the material core. It turns out that
this additional field Bm is proportional to the magnetisation M of the
material and is expressed as

Bm = #0M (5.14)

where ,u0 is the same constant (permittivity of vacuum) that appears in
Biot-Savart’s law.

It is convenient to introduce another vector ﬁeld H, called the magnetic
intensity, which is defined by

B

H=——M 1
#0 (5. 5)

where H has the same dimensions as M and is measured in units of A m‘l.
Thus, the total magnetic ﬁeld B is written as

B=MJH+M) 51m

We repeat our deﬁning procedure. We have partitioned the contribution
to the total magnetic ﬁeld inside the sample into two parts: one, due to
external factors such as the current in the solenoid. This is represented
by H. The other is due to the specific nature of the magnetic material,
namely M. The latter quantity can be inﬂuenced by external factors. This
inﬂuence is mathematically expressed as

where x, a dimensionless quantity, is appropriately called the magnetic
susceptibility. It is a measure of how a magnetic material responds to an
external field. Table 5.2 lists xfor some elements. It is small and positive
for materials, which are called paramagnetic. It is small and negative for
materials, which are termed diamagnetic. In the latter case M and H are
opposite in direction. From Eqs. (5.16) and (5.1 7) we obtain,

32 ,uo(1+;()H (5.18)
=%mH

where (1: 1 + x, is a dimensionless quantity called the relative magnetic
permeability of the substance. It is the analog of the dielectric constant in
electrostatics. The magnetic permeability of the substance is ,u and it has
the same dimensions and units as #0;

u = (tort, = (to (1+1).

The three quantities )5, ,ur and ,u are interrelated and only one of
them is independent. Given one, the other two may be easily determined.

2019-20